ا
ا a particle introducing direct and indirect questions; ا ― أم a - am in alternative questions; ا سواء― أم sawā’un a ― am no matter whether - or; و أ a-wa particle indicating or implying doubt: or? perhaps? (atau/apakah) ذلك في اوتشك (tašukku) you wouldn't doubt it, would you? do you perhaps doubt it? or do you doubt it? اال alā and اَما a-mā intensifying interjections introducing sentences: verily, truly, indeed, oh yes, etc., فانظروا اَال (fa-nẓurū) oh, do look! why, look! انه اَما (innahū) why, he is ... !
 آب āb  August = Agustus (month; Syr., Leb., Jord., Ir.)
ابو see اب 
 اب abba u to long, yearn, (وطنه إلى ilā waṯanihi for one's homeland)
 ابيب look up alphabetically
اباتي (It. abate) abātī abbot (Chr.) ابالة ibāla, ibbāla bundle, bale ابت يا see ابو
ابجد abjad alphabet
ابجدي abjadī alphabetic(al); ابجديات elementary facts, simple truths │ االبجدية الحروفthe letters of the alphabet
ابد abada (ابود ubūd) to stay, linger (ب at a place); ― i u to roam in a state of wildness, run wild, be shy, shy away, run away (animal, game) II to make lasting or permanent, perpetuate, eternize (ھ s.th.) V to be perpetuated, become lasting or permanentl; to return to a state of wildness
ابد abad pl. آباد ābād endless, eternal duration, eternity; ابدا abadan always, forever; ever, (with neg.) never (in the future), not at all, on no account; (alone, without negation) never! not at all! By no means! │ األبد إلى األبد، على and الدھر أبد abada d-dahri forever; اآلبدين ابد abada l- abadīn and اآلبدين ابد إلى ilā abadi l-a. forever and ever
ابدي abadi everlasting, eternal, endless
االبدي al-abadī eternity
 ابدي abadīya infinite duration, endless time, eternity
آبد ābid wild, untamed
آبدة ābida pl. اوابد awābid  unusual thing, prodigious event │ الدنيا اوابد a. ad- dunyā the Wonders of the World
مؤبد mu'abbad eternal, endless, everlasting │مؤبد سجن (sijn) life imprisonment
 ابر abara i u (abr) to prick, sting II to pollinate (ھ a palm tree)
ابرة ibra pl. ابر ibar needle, pln; indicator (of an instrument); shot, injection (med.);sting, prick │ ابرة حقنه ḥaqanahu ibratan to give s.o. an injection; الراعى ابرة i. ar-rā‘ī geranium (bot.); ابرة مغناطيسية (magnāṯīsīya) magnetic needle; االبرة شغل šug1 al-i. needlework
مئبر mi'bar needlecase; pack needle
بئر see ābār آبار 
-āt pl. abrūšīya ابروشية and abrašīya ابريشية
diocese, bishoprie (Chr.); parish (Chr.)
(zool.) bream ابراميس abramīs, ابرميس
ابريز pure gold 1
ابريسم ibrīsam, ibrīsim silk
ابريق ibrīq pl. اباريق abārīq  pitcher, jug
ابريل abril April
ابزن abzan pl. ابازن abāzin  washbowl
ابزيم ibzīm pl. ابازم abāzim  buckle, clasp
ابض ubḍ pl. آباض ābāḍ and مأبض ma’biḍ pl. مآبض ma’ābiḍ  hollow of the knee, popliteal space
ابط V to take or carry under one's arm (ھ s.th.); to put one's arm (ه ھ، around s.o., around s.th.), hold in one's arm (ه ھ، s.th.)
ابط ibṯ pl. آباط ābāṯ m. and f. armpit
ابق abaqa i (اباق ibāq) to escape, run away (a slave from his master)
ابق abaq a kind of hemp
آبق ābiq pl. اباق ubbāq runaway, escaped; a fugitive
 ابل ibil (coll.) camel
 ابالة ibāla, ibbāla bundle, bale
ابليز iblīz alluvial deposits (of the Nile)
ابليس iblīs pl. ابالسة abālisa devil, Satan
 ابن II to celebrate, praise, eulogize (ه a deceased person), deliver a funeral oration (ه in praise of s.o.)
ابنة ubna passive pederasty
ابان ibbān time: ابان ibbāna during, في ابان at the time of, during
تأبين ta’bīn commemoration (of a deceased person) │تأبين حفلة ḥaflat at-t. commemorative celebration (in honor of a deceased person)
مأبون ma’būn catamite; weakling, mollycoddle, sissy; scoundrel
بن  see ابن 
ابنوس abnūs ebony
ابه abaha and abiha a (abh) to pay attention ( ل, also ب to), heed (ل, also ب s.th.), take notice (ل, also ب of) │له يؤبه ال امر (yu'bahu) an insignificant, unimportant matter V to display proud, haughty manners; to turn away, keep one's distance, remain aloof (عن from), look down (عن upon), think o.s. far above (عن
s.o. or s.th.)
ابھة ubbaha splendor, pomp, ostentation, pageantry; pride
اب ab pl. آباء aba' father (also eccl.): ancestor, forefather: ابت يا yā abati O my father! االبوان al-abawān the parents, father and mother; ابونا abūnā reverend father, form of address and title of a priest (Chr). │جد عن ابا aban ‘an jaddin handed down from father to son, as s.th. inherited from forefathers; سعن  بو ا abū  su’n  marabou;  نوم ال بو ا abū  n- naum   poppy;   الھول ابو abū   l-haul   the Sphinx;   اليقظان ابو abū   l-yaqẓān   rooster, cock
ابوة ubūwa fatherhood, paternity
ابوي abawī paternal, fatherly
ebonite ابونيت
ابونيه (Fr. abonné) abūneh pl. -āt subscription; subscription card (e.g., for public conveyances, a concert season, etc.)
ابى abā a (اباء ibā’, اباءة ibā’a) to refuse, decline; to turn down, reject, scorn,
 disdain (ھ s.th.): to deny (ھ على s.o. s.th.)
│ يفعله أن اال ابى (illā an yaf’alahū) he insisted on doing it; أن إال ﷲ ابى God willed that ... V to refuse, decline
اباء ibā’, اباءة ibā’a rejection; dislike, distaste, aversion, disdain; pride
ابي abīy disdainful, scornful: proud, lofty, lofty-minded
آب ābin pl. اباة ubāh reserved, standoffish; unwilling, reluctant, grudging
ابيب abīb the eleventh month of the Coptic calendar 2
ابيقوري abīqūrī Epicurean
ابيقوري abīqūriya Epicureanism
اترج utrujj and اترنج utrunj citron (Citrus medica; bot.)
آتشجي (Turk. ateşçi) ātešgī fireman, stoker
مأتم ma’tam pl. مآتم ma’ātim  obsequies, funeral ceremony
 اتان atān pl. آتن ātun, اتن utun, utn female donkey, she-ass
 اتون atūn, attūn pl. اتن utun, اتاتن atātīn  kiln, furnace, oven
اتاوة itāwa pl. اتاوى atāwā duty, tax, tribute
اتوبيس (Fr.) otobīs autobus, bus
اتوماتيكي (Fr.) otomātīkī automatic
otomobīl (Fr.) اتوموبيل dالىlI boyl اتومبيل
automobile
اتى atā i (اتيان ityān, اتى aty, مأتاة to come (ه or الى to; على over s.o.), arrive (ھ or الى at); ب اتى to bring, bring forward, produce, advance, accomplish or achieve s.th.; ه اتى ب to bring, give or offer s.o. s.th.; to do, perform (ھ a deed), carry out, execute (ھ e.g., movements); to commit, perpetrate ( ھ a sin, a. crime); to mention (على s.th.); to finish off (على s.th., also s.o.); to finish, complete, carry through, dispose, settle, wind up, conclude, terminate, bring to a close (على s.th.); to destroy, annihilate, eradicate, wipe out (على s.th.); to eliminate, carry away, sweep away (على s.th.), do away (على with); to use up, exhaust (also a subject), present exhaustively, in great detail (على s.th.), elaborate (على on s.th.) │ يأتي كما as
follows; آخره على اتى (ākhirihī) to complete, finish s.th.; to spend or use up the last of s.th.; واليابس األخضر على اتى to destroy everything, wreak havoc; اتى ابوابھا من البيوت s.th. in the right way, knock on the right door;قبل من يؤتى yu’ta min qibali is undermined, weakened, ruined by III to offer furnish, give, afford (ب to s.o. s.th.), provide, supply (ب s.o. with); to be propitious, be favorable (ه for s.o.), favor ( ه s.o.); to turn out well (. for s.o.), be in favor (ه of); to suit, befit, become (ه s.o.), be appropriate (ه for s.o.); to agree (ه with s.o.; food) │شيء كل اتاه (kullu šai’in) everything was in his favor, turned out well for him, came his way IV to bring (ھ
s.o. s.th.); to give (ھ s.o. s.th.); to grant (ھ ه to s.o. s.th.), bestow (ھ upon s.o. s.th.) │ الزكاة آتى (zakāta) to give alms V to originate, stem, derive, spring, arise, result (عن from); to end (عن with), result (عن in); to get (الى to), arrive (الى at); to be easy to do, be feasible without difficulty, be attainable, go well, progress; to go about s.th. (فى) gently, cautiously X to ask to come, induce to come (ه s.o.)
مأتى ma’tan pl. مآت ma’ātin place where s.th. comes from; place at which one arrives; access; pl. مآت place of origin; origin, source, provenance; place where one has been or to which one has come; place where s.th. starts, where s.th. ends
آت ātin coming, next; following │
اآلتي األسبوع (usbū‘) the coming week, next week; كاآلتي as follows
موات mu’ātin, muwātin favorable, propitious, opportune, convenient, suitable
اث aṯṯa u I a (اثاثة aṯāṯa) to be luxuriant, grow profusely (hair, plants) II to fix up, prepare (ھ s.th.); to furnish (ھ an apartment) V to be or become rich, wealthy, to prosper; to be furnished
اثاث aṯāṯ furniture, furnishings (of an apartment, of a room)
تأثيث ta’ṯīṯ furnishing
اث aṯṯ, اثاث  aṯīṯ abundant, luxuriant, profusely growing (hair, plants)
اثر aṯara u i (aṯr, اثارة aṯāra) to transmit, pass along, report, relate (ھ s.th., عن from, or based on the authority of, s.o.) II to affect,
 influence (في or على s.o., s.th.), act (في or على upon), produce an effect, make an impression, have influence (في or على on); to induce (phys.) IV to prefer (على ھ s.th. to), like (ھ s.th.) more (على than); to have a predilection, a liking (ھ for), like (ھ s.th.), be fond (ھ of); to choose, deem wise or advisable (ان to do s.th.); to adore (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) │بالخير نفسه آثر (nafsahū bi-l- kair) to wish o.s. well, hope for the best for o.s. V to be impressed, be influenced; to let o.s. be impressed, be impressible; to be moved, be touched (ب or ل by, also من); to be excited, be stimulated; to be affected (ب by, said of materials, e.g., iron by acid); to be induced (phys.); to follow in s.o.’s (ه) tracks, follow s.o.’s example, emulate (ه s.o.); to pursue, follow up (ھ a question, a problem); to perceive, feel (ھ s.th.) X to claim a monopoly; to possess alone, with the exclusion of others, monopolize (ب s.th.); to appropriate (ب s.th.), take exclusive possession (ب of); to preoccupy (ھ s.th.), engross (ھ the attention) │استأثر به ﷲ the Lord has taken him unto Himself
اثر aṯar pl. آثار āṯār track, trace, vestige; sign, mark; touch; impression, effect, action, influence (في on); tradition (relating the deeds and utterances of Mohammed and his Companions); work (of art, esp. of literature); ancient monument; آثار antiquities; remnants, vestiges; (religious) relics │اآلثار علم ‘ilm al-a. archeology; اآلثار دار museum of antiquities; له اثر ال (aṯara) ineffective, ineffectnal; رجعي بأثر (raj‘ī) with retroactive force (jur.); عين بعد اثرا اصبح aṣbaḥa aṯaran ba‘da ‘ainin to be destroyed, be wiped out, leave nothing but memory behind; عين بعد اثرا اعاده (a‘adahū) to destroy s.th. completely ; اثره في اثره، على (also fī iṯrihī) on his (its) track, at his heels, after him; immediately afterwards, presently, thereupon; ;'11 j. immediately afterwards, presently
اثر iṯra (prep.) immediately after, right after
اثري aṯarī archeologic(a1); archeologist (also آثاري āṯārī); old, ancient, antique │ اثري عالم archeologist; اثرية لغة (luga) dead language
اثر aṯir egoistic, selfish
اثرة aṯara selfishness, egoism
اثير aṯīr favored, preferred (عند by s.o.), in favor (عند with s.o.); select, exquisite, noble; see also alphabetically
اثارة aṯāra remainder, remnant; faint trace, vestige
مأثرة ma’ṯara, ma’ṯura pl. مآثر ma’āṯir 
exploit, feat, glorious deed
تأثير ta’ṯīr action, effect, influence, impression (على في، on); effectiveness, efficacy; induction (phys.)
تأثيري ta’ṯīrī produced by induction, inductive, inductional, induced (phys.)
إيثار īṯār preference; altruism; predilection; love, affection
تأثر ta’aṯṯur being influenced; agitation, emotion, feeling; excitability, sensitivity; (pl. -āt) feeling, sensation, perception │ التأثر سريع easily impressed, impressible, sensitive
المذھب التأثري  ta’aṯṯurī: تأثري
(madhab)the impressionistic movement
تأثرية ta’atturīya impressionism
استئثار isti’tār arrogation of a monopoly; monopolization; presumption, presumptuousness; exclusive power
مأثور ma’tūr transmitted, handed down
(kalima) كلمة مأثورة and (qaul)قول مأثور │ proverb
مؤثر mu’attir affecting, acting upon; effective; impressive; moving, touching, pathetic; (pl. -āt) influencing factor, influence
 أثير look up alphabetically
أثفية utfīya pl. أثاف atāfin trivet, tripod (in &ncient times: &ny one of the three stones supporting a cooking pot near the fire) │ األثافي ثالثة that which rounds out a number, caps s.th., puts the lid on s.th., the crowning touch
اثل atala i to consolidate, strengthen II to become rich V to be consolidated, be strengthened; to become rich
اثل atl pl. اثول utūl (coll.; n. un. pl.
atalat) tamarisk (bot.)
 اثيل atīl and مؤثل mu’attal deep-rooted; of noble origin, highborn
اثم atima a (itm, atam, مأثم ma’tam) to sin, err, slip V to eschew sin, shun evil; to restrain
o.s. hold back
اثم itm pl. آثام ātām sin, offense, misdeed, crime
مأثم ma’tam pl. مآثم sin, offense, misdeed, crime
تأثيم sin, offense, misdeed, crime
آثم ātim pl. اثمة atama and اثيم atīm pl. اثماء atmā’ sinful, criminal, wicked, evil; sinner
اثمد itmid antimony
اثير atīr ether
اثينا atīnā Athens
اثيوبيا atyūbiyā Ethiopia
an (pl.-ūn) Ethiopian; atyūbī  اثيوبي Ethiopiaالبالد االثيوبية │ Ethiopian
اج ajja u i (اجيج ajīj) to burn, blaze, flame (fire)
II to light, kindle, start (ھ a fire) V = I اجاج ماء mā’ ujāj bitter, salty water اجاج ajjāj burning, blazing, hot
متأجج muta’ajjij burning, blazing, flaming
اجبية ajabīya horologium (Copt.-Chr.)
 أجر ajara u (ajr) to reward, recompense, remunerate (ھ s.o.) II to let for rent, let out, hire out, rent, lease (ھ s.th.); (with nafsahū) to hire s.o. out IV to let for rent, let out, hire out, rent, lease (ھ s.th.); to rent, hire, lease, hold under a lease (ھ s.th.), take a lease, (ھ on); to hire, engage, take on (ه s.o.), engage the services (ه of s.o.) X to rent, hire, lease, hold under a lease (ھ.th.), take a lease (ھ on); to charter (ھ a vessel); to hire, engage, take on (ه s.o.), engage the service (ه of s.o.)
اجر ajr pl. اجور ujūr wages, pay, honorarium, recompense, emolument, remuneration; price, rate, fee │ السفر اجور
u. as-safar fares
اجرة ujra hire, rent, rental; price, rate, fee; fixed rate, (official) charge; postage │ البريد اجرة postage; النقل اجرة u. an-naql
transport charges, freight(age), carriage, cartage
اجير ajīr pl. اجراء ujarā’ hireling; workman, laborer, day laborer; employee
اجيرة ajīra working woman, factory girl, female laborer; woman employee
تأجير ta’jīr letting, leasing, hiring out, letting on lease; lease│ التأجير مشروع واإلعارة (i‘āra) Lend-Lease Act
ايجار ījār pl. -āt rent; letting, leasing, hiring out, letting on lease│ لإليجار for rent, to let
اجارة ijāra pl. -āt rent; letting, leasing, hiring out, letting on lease
استئجار isti’jār rent, lease, tenure
مأجور ma’jūr paid, salaried, on the payroll, gainfully employed; employee; mercenary, venal, hired, bribed
مؤجر mu’ajjir pl. -ūn landlord, lessor
مستأجر musta’jir leaseholder, lessee, tenant; employer 5
 آجر ājurr (n. un. ة) baked brick
جزء see اجزاجي جزء see اجزاخانة pear ijjāṣ اجاص
اجل ajala a (ajal) to hesitate, tarry, linger II to delay, postpone, put off, defer, adjourn (ھ الى s.th. till) V to be postponed, be deferred, be adjourned (مؤجر till, to) X to request postponement (ھ of s.th.); to seek to delay (ھ s.th.)
اجل ajal yes, indeed! certainly! by all means!
ألجل li-ajli or اجل من min ajli because of, on account of, for the sake of; for │ ألجل أنin order that, that, so that; ھذا أجل من therefore, for that reason, on this account
اجل ajal pl. آجال ājāl appointed time, date, deadline; instant of death; respite, delay│باألجل on credit (com.); األجل قصير short-term, short-time; short-lived: أجل إلى مسمى غير (gairi musammā) for an indefinite period, sine die, until further notice
تأجيل ta’jīl delay, postponement, adjournment, deferment, respite; appointment of a time or date
 آجل ājil delayed, protracted; deferred; later, future (as opposed to او عاجال │(عاجل آجال’ājilan au ājilan, آجله او عاجله في sooner or later, now or later on; واآلجل العاجل في now and in the future
اآلجلة al-ājila the life to come, the hereafter
مؤجل mu’ajjal delayed, late, postponed, deferred; fixed in time, deadlined
اجمة ajama, coll. اجم ajam pl. -āt, اجم ujum, آجام ājām thicket, jungle, forest: reeds, canebrake
ba‘ūḍat بعوضة األجمية malaria│ ajamiya اجمية anopheles al-a.
آجن ājin brackish (water)
اجندة ajanda notebook
اح aḥḥa u (aḥḥ) to cough
احد II to make into one, unite, unify (ھ s.th.)
وحد see اتحد VIII
احد aḥad, f. احدى one: somebody, someone, anybody, anyone (esp. in negative sentences and questions); األحد the One (God); Sunday│احدھم aḥaduhum every one of them; األحد يوم yaum al-a. Sunday; أحد السعف  a. as-sa‘af Palm Sunday; العنصرة أحد
a. al-‘anṣara Whitsunday; األلوف آحد āḥād al-ulūf a few thousand (2-9000; as distinguished from األلوف عشرات and مئات األلوف)
احدي aḥadī dominical, Sunday (adj.)
احدية aḥadīya unity, oneness
اآلحد al-āḥād the units (math.)
  احن aḥina a (aḥan) to bate (على s.o.)
احنة iḥna pl. احن iḥan old feud, deep-rooted hatred
اوح see احين   اخو see اخ اخو see اخت
اخذ aḳaḍa u (aḳḍ) to take (ھ من s.th. from or out of): to take (ھ s.th.) along: to get, receive, obtain (ھ من s.th. from); to take up, seize (ھ s.th.); to grab (ب s.o., s.th.), take hold of (ب): to perceive, notice (ه s.o., said of the eye); to gather, understand, infer, deduce (ھ من s.th. from), read (ھ s.th.) between the lines (من of); to grip,
captivate, thrill, spellbind (ب s.o.); to take up, acquire, make one's own (ب s.th., e.g., a method); to keep, adhere (ب to), observe, take over, adopt, embrace, follow, copy, imitate (ب s.th.); to accept ( ب s.th.); to take, lead (ب الى s.o. to); to admonish, urge, drive (ه ب s.o. to do s.th.); to enjoin, impose (ه ب on s.o. s.th.); to take away (على ه from s.o. s.th.), strip, deprive ( على ه s.o. of), cut off, bar (على ه s.o. from); to reproach, hlame (على ه s.o. for); to hold against s.o. (على) that ... (ان), fix the blame (على on s.o., ان for the fact that); to obligate (على ب s.o. to); to learn (على or عن from s.o., ھ s.th.), acquire knowledge (على or عن from s.o.), عنه العلم أخذ ('ilm) to study under s.o.; to begin, start (في or ب with s.th. or s.th., with foll. imperf.: to do s.th.), prepare, set out, be about (في or ب to do s.th.) │ أبھته أخذ (uhbatahū) to make preparations, prepare o.s., get ready; أخذ فالن مأخذ (ma’ḳad) to adopt the same course as s.o. else, follow s.o.’s example; مأخذا منه أخذ to seize s.o., take possession of
s.o. (a sensation, or the like); مجراه أخذ (majrāhu) to take its course; مجلسه أخذ (majlisahū) to take one's seat, sit down; خذره أخذ (ḥidrahū) to be on one's guard; بالحسنى أخذه (ḥusnā) to be friendly, be nice to s.o.; بخاطره أخذ (bi-ḳāṯirihī) to show o.s. complaisant toward s.o., try to please s.o.; بذنبه أخذ (bi-danbihi) to punish s.o. for his offense; رأيه أخذ (ra'yahū) to ask s.o.’s opinion, consult s.o.; عليه الرأي أخذ (uḳida
r-ra'yu) the matter was put to a vote; أخذ بأسباب (bi-asbābi) to embrace, adopt s.th., e.g., األروبية الحضارة بأسباب أخذ (ḥaḍāra) to adopt European culture; بالشدة أخذ (šidda) to deal with s.o. severely, give s.o. a rough time; طريقه عليه أخذ to obstruct s.o.’s way, hinder s.o. from moving on; عاتقه على أخذ to shoulder s.th., take s.th. upon o.s.; العدة أخذ ل (‘udda) to prepare, set out, get ready to do s.th.; عھدا عليه أخذ (‘ahdan) to put s.o. under an obligation, impose a commitment on s.o.; غرة (حين) على أخذ uḳida ‘alā (ḥīni) girratin to be taken by surprise, be caught unawares; بالمقابلة أخذ (muqābala) to repay like for like; يأخذ شيء القلوب s.th. which captivates the heart, a fascinating, thrilling thing; المطر أخذنا (maṯarū) we got caught in the rain; أخذ بناصره (bi-nāṣirihi) to help s.o., stand by
 s.o., take care of s.o., look after s.o.; أخذ نفسه (nafasahū) to draw breath; عليه أخذ أنفاسه to take s.o.’s breath away; النوم أخذ (naum) sleep overwhelmed him; بيده أخذ (bi-yadihī) to help s.o., stand by s.o. II to lay under a spell, enchant, bewitch (ه s.o.) III to censure, blame (ه على ب، s.o. for s.th.); to punish (ه على ب، s.o. for); to hold s.th. (على) against s.o. (ه), resent (على s.th. ه, in s.o.)│ تؤاخذني ال lā tu’āḳidnī pardon me! forgive me! no offense, I hope! VIII اتخذ ittaḳada to take (ه s.th.); to take on, assume (ھ s.th.); to take up, occupy (ھ s.th.); to pass, adopt (ھ e.g., a resolution); to take, single out, have in mind (ه ه ھ، ھ
s.o. or s.th. as); to make use (ھ of s.th.), use (ھ s.th.); to imitate, affect (ھ e.g., s.o.’s manner of speaking); to make (ھ من s.th. out of s.o. or s.th.)│ شكال اتخذ (šaklan) to take on a form or shape; موقفا اتخذ (mauqifan) to take an attitude, assume a position; االزمة التدابير اتخذ to take the necessary measures; قرارا اتخذ (qarāran) to pass or adopt a resolution; الجديدة المواقع اتخذ to take up new positions (troops)
أخذ aḳd acceptance, reception; seizure; taking out, taking away, removal, etc.│ أخذ الرأي a. ar-ra'y voting, vote; ورد أخذ  (wa- radd) discussion, debate, dispute, argument; ردا وال أخذا يقبل ال شيء (yaqbalu) an indisputable matter; وعطاء أخذ
(wa-‘aṯā’) give-and-take; traffic, trade; dealings, relations (esp. business, commercial); discussion, debate; fight, battle
أخذة uḳda spell, charm أخيذ aḳīd prisoner of war أخيذة aḳīda booty, spoils
أخاذ aḳḳād captivating, fascinating, thrilling
مأخذ ma’ḳad pl. مآخذ ma’āḳid  place from which one takes s.th., source; O wall socket, outlet (el.); adoption, borrowing, loan; manner of acting, mode of procedure, approach; pl. مآخذ source references, bibliography (in booke); reprehensible points, faults, flaws, defects, shortcomings│ األقرب المأخذ the simplest, easiest approach; المأخذ قريب easy to handle or to use; see wao aḳada (middle of paragraph)
مؤاخذة mu’āḳada objection, exception; censure, blame│ مؤاخذة ال! (mu’āḳadata) pardon me! no offense, I hope!
أخذ ma’ḳūd taken, seized; taken by surprise, caught, trapped; surprised; taken (ب with), fascinated (ب by); به مأخوذ in force, valid
مأخوذات ma’ḳūdāt receipts, takings, returns (com.)
اخر II to delay, put off, defer, postpone, adjourn (ھ s.th.); to hinder, impede, obstruct, hold up (ه s.o., ھ s.th.), slow down, retard (ھ s.th.); to draw out, delay ( عن s.th. beyond its appointed time); to put back (ه ,ھ s.o., s.th.), shelve (ھ s.th.); to set back (ھ a watch, a clock); to suspend, discharge, dismiss, remove (ه s.o. from an office) V to be late; to be delayed, fall or lag behind (عن), tarry, linger, hesitate; to default (عن on), be behindhand, be in arrears (عن with), be behind (عن in); to hesitate (عن with); to be suspended (from service), be discharged, be dismissed│ لم ان من ذلك بعد يتأخر after that, he did not hesitate long before he …, presently, he ...
آخر āḳir pl. -ūn, -āt, اواخر awaḳir  last, ultimate, utmost, extreme; end, close, conclusion; foot, bottom (of a paper); اآلخر and اآلخرة the hereafter│ اآلخرة الدار the abode in the hereafter, the everlasting abode; آخره الىilā ākīirihī and so forth, et cetera; األمر آخر āḳir l-amri eventually, finally, in the end, after all; الدھر آخر āḳir d-dahri forever; الزمان آخر a. az-zamān time at which the Day of Judgment is to be expected, the end of the world; آخره عن to the last, down to the grass roots, entirely, completely, e.g., آخره عن دمر (dummira) to be completely destroyed, be wiped off the map; آخره من from behind, from the rear; آخر له ما endless, infinite; في اآلخر آخر after all, last of all; الشھر اواخر a. aš-šahr the end of the month, the last ten days of the month; آخرا وليس اخيرا last but not least
اآلخرة al-āḳira the hereafter
آخر āḳar  , f. اخرى uḳrā, pl. comm. اخر uḳar   (and آخرون āḳarūn or اخريات respectively) another, one more, اآلخر the other│ اخرى مرة (marratan) once more; ھي اآلخر ھو األخرى، he also, she also, he in
 turn, she in turn, اآلخر انا I also; كانت ان األخرى (in kānat) otherwise; آخر الى آن من from time to time; اخرى الى سنة من (sana) from year to year; واخرى فترة بين (fatra) once in a while, from time to time; آونة―اخرى (awinatan) sometimes -- sometimes, at times -- at times
األخرى al-uḳrā the hereafter
اخروي uḳrawī of or relating to the life to come or the hereafter
اخير aḳīr last; latest; rearmost; the second of two; اخيرا eventually, finally, in the end, after all, at last; recently, the other day; االخير―األول the former—the latter│ آخرا وليس اخيراlast but not least
مئخار mi’ḳār palm which retains its fruit into the winter
تأخير ta’ḳīr delay, deferment, postponement; obstruction, retardation; putting back, temporary shelving
تأخر.f ta’aḳḳar delay, lag, retardation; hesitation, tarrying, lingering; slowness, tardiness; backwardness, underdevelopment (of a country)
مؤخر mu’aḳḳar rear part, tail, end; atern (of a ship); remainder, balance (of a sum, to be paid later); مؤخرا mu’aḳḳaran recently, lately, the other day; at last, finally, eventually
مؤخرة mu’aḳḳara rear, rear guard (of an army); rear positions or lines (mil.); stern (of a ship)
متأخر muta’aḳḳir delayed, belated, late; occurring later (عن than); behind, behindhand in arrears; backward, underdeveloped; lagging, staying behind; defaulter; المتأخرون the later, or modern, authors, writers, or the like (as opposed to المتأخرات ؛(المتقدمون arrears, balance of a سum remaining due after previous payment│ المتأخرة البلدان (buldān) the underdeveloped countries
اخطبوط uḳṯubūṯ octopus
اخو III to fraternize, associate as brothers (ه with s.o.) V to act or show o.s. as a brother or friend VI to fraternize, associate as brothers
اخ aḳ pl. اخو iḳwa, اخوان iḳwān brother; fellow man, neighbor; friend; pl. اخوان specif., brethren or members of an order; اإلخوان religious brotherhood of the Wahabi sect, militant in character, established by Ibn Sa‘ūd in 1910│ أخي يا my dear friend! ثقة اخو aḳū tiqa trustworthy, reliable; شقيق اخ brother through both father and mother, brother- german
اخت uḳt pl. اخوات aḳawāt sister; (gram.) cognate; counterpart│ اختھا the other (of two), its mate, its counterpart (after a fem. noun)
خوي ḳuwaiy little brother
اخوي aḳawi brotherly, fraternal
اخوية aḳawīya brotherhood (as a religious association)
اخاء iḳā’, اخوة uḳūwa brotherhood, brotherliness, fraternity
اخاوة iḳāwa fraternization, fraternity, brotherliness
تآخ ta’āḳin fraternization
اخور aḳūr barn, stable
اد adda u i to befall, afflict (ه a.o.)
اد امر amr idd a terrible, evil, horrible thing
ادب aduba u (adab) to be well-bred, well- mannered, cultured, urbane, have refined tastes; ― adaba i (adb) to invite (to a party or banquet, ه s.o.), entertain (ه s.o.)│ مأدبة ادب (ma'duba) to arrange a banquet, give a formal dinner II to refine, educate (ه s.o.); to discipline, punish, ehastise (ه s.o.) IV to invite as a guest (ه s.o.) V to receive a fine education; to be well-bred, well- educated, cultured, have refined tastes; to show o.s. polite, courteous, civil, urbane; to educate o.s., refine one’s tastes (ب by, through); to let o.s. be guided (ب by)│
بأدبه تأدب (bi-adabihi) to follow s.o.’s moral example
ادب adab pl. آداب ādab culture, refinement; good breeding, good manners, social graces, decorum, decency, propriety, seemliness; humanity, humaneness; the humanities; belles- lettres│األدب بيت toilet, water closet; قليل
 األدب and األدب عديم ill-mannered, ill-bred, impolite, uncivil; العامي األدب (‘āmmī) popular literature; األدب رجال literati, men of letters; اآلداب كلية kullīyat al-ā. (= faculté des lettres) college of arts; آداب rules, rules of conduct, e.g., السلوك آداب rules of decorum, etiquette; اآلداب decency, morals
ادبيadabī moral, ethic(al); literary│ ادبي واجب moral obligation; وماديا ادبيا adabiyan wa-māddīyan morally and physically; األدبية الفلسفة (falsafa) ethics, moral science
ادبيات adabīyāt lliterature, belles-lettres
ادبخانة adabḳāna pl. -āt toilet, water closet
اديب adīb pl. ادباء udabā’ cultured, refined, educated; well.bred, well- mannered, civil, urbane; a. man of culture and refined tastes; man of letters, writer, author
اديبة adība authoress, writer
مأدبة ma’duba pl. مآدب ma’ādib banquet, formal dinner
تأديب ta’dīb education; discipline; punishment, chastisement; disciplinary punishment│التأديب مجلس majlis at-t. disciplinary board
تأديبي ta'dībī disciplinary; punitive, retaliatory│ تأديبية قضية(qaḍīya) disciplinary action
تأدب ta’addub good breeding, good manners, civility, politeness, courteousness, tact
آدب ādib host
مؤدب mu’addib pl. -ūn educator; teacher in a Koranic school (Tun.); ― mu'addab well-bred, well-mannered, civil, urbane
ادرة udra scrotal hernia
ادرنة adirna  Edirne, Adrianople (city in NW Turkey)
االدياتيك (Fr. adriatique) al-adriyātīk and بحر االدياتيك baḥr al-a. the Adriatic Sea
  ادم adama i (adm) to take some additional food (ھ with the bread), enrich (ھ the bread) with some extra food or condiment
ادام idām anything eaten with bread; shortening, fatty ingredient
 ادم adam, adama skin
اديم adīm skin; surface; tanned skin, leather│األرض اديم a. al-arḍ the surface of the earth
ادام addām tanner
 آدم ādam  Adam│آدم ابن human being
آدمي ādamī human; humane; poor, inferior, meager; (pl. -ūn, (اوادم awadim ) human being
آدمية ādamīya humaneness, humanity; humanism
اداة adāh pl. ادوات adawāt tool; instrument; utensil, implement, device, appliance; apparatus; (gram.) particle│ الحكم اداة a. al- ḥukm machinery of government; اداة التعريف definite article (gram.); التنفيذية اداة (tanfīdīya) executive agency; pl. materials, equipment, gear, حربية ادوات (ḥarbīya) war material; احطياطية ادواوت (iḥtiyāṯīya) stand- by equipment (techn.); منزلية ادوات (manzilīya) household utensils, household effects
األدون al-adōn (Hebr.) the Lord; Mr.	(Isr.)
ادى II to convey, take, bring, lead, steer, channel (ب ه ھ، s.o., s.th., الى to), see that
s.o. or s.th. (ه ھ، or ب) gets to (الى); to bring about, cause, effect, produce (الى s.th.); to lead, contribute, be conducive ( الى to a result); to amount, come practically (الى to); to tend (الى to), aim (الى at); to carry out, execute, discharge (ھ s.th.); to perform (ھ a ritual, etc.); to do ( واجبه wājibahū one’s duty); to fulfill (وظيفة a function, رسالة a mission); to accomplish (مأمورية a task); to take (يمينا an oath; امتحانا an examination); to render (خدمة ḳidmatan a service, ل or الى to s.o.; ھ e.g., a meaning, a musical composition, etc.)│ادى (salām) to greet, salute V to lead, be conducive, contribute (الى to results); to be carried out, be performed, be accomplished; to 10 arrive (إلى at), be lead (إلى to) X to demand, claim (ه ھ from s.o. s.th.)
اداء adā’ pl. -āt (as verbal noun of II) rendering (of a service); pursuit, performance, execution, discharge (of a
 duty), realization, effectuation, accomplishment (of a task); rendition, reading (e.g., of a musical composition); fulfillment; payment│ األداء حسن ḥusn al-a. good rendition (of a work of art, of a musical composition)
تأدية ta’diya rendering (of a service); pursuit, performance, execution, discharge (of a duty), realization effectuation; accomplishment (of a task); fulfillment; payment
مؤدى mu’addan assignment, task, function; sense, meaning, signification, import, underlying idea
اذ id 1. (introducing a verbal clause) (and) then; ذاك إذ id dāka (also written إذاك) then, at that time, at the same time, in doing so;
2. (conj.; temp. and caus.) as, when; since, as, the more so as, because; ان اذ id anna since, as, in view of the fact that; for, because
  ١ اذا. (introducing a nominal clause the subject of which may he expressed by ب with foll. genit.) and then, and all of a sudden; (with noun in nominative case or with ب) there was … and all of a sudden there was …; 2. (conj.) when; if, whenever; whether, if (introducing indirect questions); ما اذا when, whenever; ا اذا ال (illā) unless if not; except when
  اذن) اذا) idan then, therefore, in that case, hence, consequently
آذار ādār  March (month; Syr., Leb., Jord., Ir.)
 اذن adina a to listen (إلى to s.o..); to allow, permit (ل في s.o. s.th.); to hear, learn (ب of s.th.), be informed (ب about) II to call (ب to), esp. to call to prayer (بالصالة); to crow (rooster) IV to announce, make known (ب s.th., ه ب to s.o. s.th.), inform, notify (ه s.o.); to call to prayer; to call upon s.o. (ه), urge, admonish, exhort (ه s.o..) to do s.th. ( ب); to herald (ب or ھ s.th.); to foreshadow (ب s.th.); to be on the verge (ان of doing s.th..)│ بالزوال) بالسقوط آذن) (zawāl) to show signs of the imminent downfall (end); آذن بانتصاف الليل (lailu bi-ntiṣāf) it was close to midnight V to herald, announce (ب s.th.) X to ask permission (في to do s.th., rarely ب); to ask permission to enter (على s.o.'s house), have o.s. announced (على to s.o.);
to take leave (من of s.o.), say good-by (من to)
باذن ﷲ authorization; permission, idn اذن اذون (pl. willing; God choose, God if اذن order│ (postal) udūnāt) اذونات udūn, اذن order; money postal اذونات البريد pl. البريد do. البوسته
اذن udun, udn pl. آذان ādan ear; handle (of a cup)│ الوسطى االذن التھاب (wusṯā) middle-ear infection, otitis media (med.)
اذان adān call to prayer
اذنية udaina little ear; ear lobe
مآذن pl. midana مئذنة ma’dana, مأذنة
ma’ādin  minaret
ايذان idān declaration, proclamation, announcement (ب of s.th..)│ بانتھاء ايذنا الحديث indicating that the conversation is (was) ended
مأذون ma’dūun authorized; slave with limited legal rights (Isl. Law); = مأذون شرعي (šar‘ī) official authorized by the cadi to perform civil marriages (Isl. Law)
مأذونية ma’dūnīya leave, furlough (mil.
Syr.); license, franchise (Syr.)
مؤذن mu’addin muezzin, announcer of the hour of prayer
اذا  see idan اذن
اذى adiya a to suffer damage, be harmed IV to hs.rm, hurt, wrong (ه s.o.); to molest, annoy, irritate, trouble (ه s.o.)│يؤذي ال lā yu’dī innocuous, harmless, inoffensive V to suffer damage, be wronged; to feel offended, be hurt
اذى adan, اذاة adāh, اذية adīya damage, harm; injury; trouble, annoyance, grievance, wrong, offense, insult
اذاية idāya damage, harm, harmfulness, noxiousness
ايذاء īdā’ harm, damage, prejudice; offense,. hurt; grievance, nuisance
مؤذ mu’din hurtful, harmful, injurious, detrimental, prejudicial; annoying, irksome, troublesome; painful, hurting, offensive, insulting
a arātiqa  اراتقة pl.  اراتيكي and arātīqī  اراتيقي (Chr.) heretic
 آرامى ārāmī Aramaean; Aramaic
ارب ariba a (arab) to be skillful, proficient (ب in s.th.); -- araba i to tighten (ھ a knot) III to try to outwit (ه s.o.)
ارب arab pl. آراب ārāb wish (في for), desire, need (في of s.th.); purpose. aim, goal, end
ارب irb pl. آراب ārāb limb│اربا اربا مزقه (mazzaqahū) to tear s.th. to pieces or to shreds
اربة irba skill, resourcefulness, cleverness, smartness
اربة urba pl. ارب urab knot, bow
اريب arīb skillful, resourceful, clever, intelligent
مأرب ma’rab pl. مآرب ma’ārib  wish, desire; object of desire, purpose, aim, goal, end
اربيل arbīl Erbil (the ancient Arbela, city in N Iraq)
ارتوازي artuwaāzī artesian (well)
 ارث II to sow dissension (بين between, among)
 ارث irt inheritance, heritage; estate (of inheritance)
the االرثوذكسية orthodox; urtūduksī ارثوذكسي Church Orthodox
االرثوذكسي الروم ar=rūm al-urtūduksī the Greek Orthodox Church
ارج arija a (araj, اريج arīj) to be fragrant V do.
ارج araj fragrance, sweet smell ارج arij fragrant, sweet-smelling اريج arīj fragrance, sweet smell
ارجح II ta’arjaḥa to rock, swing
متأرجح muta'arjiḥ fluctuating االرجنتين al-arjantīn Argentina ارجوان urjuwān purple
ارجوان urjuwānī purple(-colored)
ارجوز popular spelling (eg.) of جوز قره ’aragōz
(q.v.); Punch (in a Punch and Judy show)
ارخ II to date (ھ a letter, and the like, ب with a date); to write the history of s.th. (ھ)
تاريخ ta'rīḳ dating (of a letter, etc.); ta'rīḳ pl. تواريخ tawārīḳ  date; time; history; chronicle, annals│ الحياة تاريخ t. al-ḥayāh biography; curriculum vitae; عام تاريخ (‘āmm) world history; التاريخ علماء the historians
تاريخي tārīḳī historic(al)
مؤرخ mu'arriḳ pl. -ūn historiographer, historian, chronicler, annalist; -- mu’arraḳ dated
ارخبيل arḳabīl archipelago
ارخن (άρχων) pl. اراخنة arāḳina archon, pl. notables (Chr.-Copt.)
اردب irdabb (now usually pronounced ardabb)pl. ارادب arādib  ardeb, a dry measure (Eg.; = 1981)
اردبة irdabba cesspool
االردن al-urdunn Jordan (river and country)
اردني urdunni Jordanian│ االردنية المملكة الھاشمية al-mamlaka al-u. al-hāšimīya the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan (official designation)
اردواز (Fr. ardoise) arduwāz slate
  ارز arz (n. un. ة) cedar
  ارز aruzz rice
ارس arasa i (ars) to till the land
اريس irrīs and arīs peasant, farmer
ارستقراطي  aristuqrāṯī aristocratic; ristocrat
ارستقراطية aristuqrāṯīya aristocracy
ارسطو arisṯū Aristotle
ارش arš indemnity, amercement, fine, penalty; blood money (for the shedding of blood; Isl. Law)
ابسقوبس ارشي (Gr. ὰρχιεπίσϰοπος) archbishop
ارشيدوقة archduke, archiduc) (Fr. ارشيدوق
archduchess
ارض arḍ f., pl. اراض arāḍīn, اراضون arāḍūn earth; land, country, region, area; terrain, ground, soil│ السفلى االرض (suflā) the nether world; المقدسة االرض (muqaddasa) the Holy Land, Palestine
ارضي arḍī terrestrial, of the earth; soil-, land- (in compounds); situated on or near
 the ground, ground (adj.); earthly; underground, subterranean
شوكي ارضي arḍī šaukī artichoke
ارض araḍ (coll.; n. un. ة) termite; woodworm
ارضية arḍīya pl. -āt floor; ground (also, e.g., of a printed fabric, of a painting); ground floor, first floor (tun.); storage, warehouse charges
ارضروم arḍurum  Erzurum (city in NE Turkey)
ارطة (also اورطة) urṯa pl. ارط uraṯ (اورط) battalion (formerly, Eg.; mil.)
ارطقة arṯaqa pl. -āt heresy (Chr.)
ريع see تاريع
ارغن urgun pl. اراغن aragin  organ (mus. instr.)
ارول urgūl, argūl a wind instrument (related to the clarinet, consisting of two pipes of unequal length)
ارق ariqa a to find no sleep II to make sleepless (ه s.o.), prevent s.o. (ه) from sleeping
ارق araq sleeplessness, insomnia
اريكة arika pl. ارائك arā’ik  couch, sofa; throne
اركيلة argīla pl. اراكيل arāgīl  (syr.) water pipe, narghile
ارلندي irlandī Irish
  ارم arama i to bite
حرق االرم teeth│ molar urram ارم
(ḥarraqa) to gnash one's teeth (in anger)
ارومة arūma, urūma root, origin; stump of a tree
مئرم mi'ram root (of a tooth)
  آرامārām (= ارام) pl. of رئم ri'm) white antelopes
االرمن al-arman the Armenians
ارمني armanī Armenian (adj. and n.)
ارمينيا armēniyā Armenia
االرناوط al-arnāwuṯ the Albanians
ارناوطي arnāwuṯī Albanian
ارنب arnab f., pl. ارانب arānib  hare; rabbit│ ھندي ارنب (hindī) guinea pig
ارنبة االنف doe│ hare, female arnaba ارنبة
a. al-anf tip of the nose; nose, muzzle (of an animal)
ارنيك (Turk. örnek) urnīk pl. ارانيك arānīk 
pattern, model; form, blank
اروبا urubbā Europe
اروبي urubbī European (adj. and n.)
 ارى ary honey
 آرى ārī Aryan
آرية ārīya Aryanism
اريحا arīḥā Jericho
از azza u i (ازيز aziz) to simmer; to hum, buzz; to whiz, hiss; to fizzle; to wheeze
ازيز azīz hum(ming), buzz(ing); whizzing, whizz, whistle (e.g., of bullets)
  ازب azaba i (azb) to flow, run (water)
مئزاب mi'zāb pl. مآزيب ma'āzīb  and ميزاب mīzāb pl. ميازيب mayāzīb  drain; gutter, eaves trough
 ازب izb dumpy, pudgy, stocky; small man
االزبك al-uzbak the Uzbeks
ازر azara i (azr) to surround (ھ s.th.) II to clothe (ه s.o. with an ازار izār q.v.); to cover, wrap up (ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to strengthen, brace (ه s.o., ھ s.th.) III to help (ه s.o.); to support, back up, strengthen (ه s.o.) V and VIII to put on an izār (see below), wrap s.o. in an izār VI to help each other; to rally, unite, join forces
ازر azr strength│ ازره شد šadda azrahū or من شد ازره (min azrihi) to help, support, encourage s.o., back s.o. up; šadda azruhū to be energetic, vigorous, lusty, courageous
ازار izār m. and f., pl. ازر uzur loincloth; wrap, shawl; wrapper, covering, cover
مئزر  mi’zar pl. مآزر  ma’āzīr  apron; wrapper, covering, cover
مؤازرة mu’āzara support, aid, assistance, backing
تآزر  ta’āzur mutual assistance
ازف azila a (awaf, ازوف uzūf) to come, approach, draw near (a time)
 ازق azaqa i (azq) to be narrow V do.
مأزق ma'ziq pl. مآزق ma’āziq  narrow passageway, narrow pass, strait, bottle- neck; predicament, fix, dilemma, critical situation, also حرج مأزق (ḥarij)
ازل azl pl. آزال āzāl eternity (without beginning), sempiternity
ازلي azali eternal, sempiternal
ازلية azalīya sempiternity, eternity
ازم V to be or become critical, come to a head (situation, relations)
ازمة azma pl. azamāt emergency; crisis│ وزارية ازمة (wizāriya) cabinet crisis
تأزم ta'azzum: الحالة تأزم t. al-hāla critical development, aggravation of the situation
مأزوم ma'zūm victim of a crisis
ازمير izmīr  Izmir (formerly Smyrna, sea-port in W Turkey)
chisel   azāmīl ازاميل pl. izmīl ازميل
ازوت (Engl.) azōt azote, nitrogen
ازوتي azōtī nitrogenous
ازى III to be opposite s.th. (ه), face (ه s.o., ھ
s.th.)
ازاء izā’a (prep.) opposite, face to face with, facing; in front of; in the face of (e.g., of a situation); as compared with; بازاء bi-izā’i opposite, face to face with, facing; in front of; ازاء على ‘alā izā’i in the face of (e.g., of a situation)
 آس ās myrtle
 آس pl. -āt ace (playing card)
 آس II to found, establish, set up (ھ s.th.), lay the foundation (ھ for) V to be founded, be established, he set up
اس foundation, basis; exponent of a power (math.)
اس asās pl. اسس usus foundation (also, of a building), fundament, groundwork, ground, basis; keynote. Tonic (mus.)│على اساس (with foll. genit.) on the basis of, on the strength of, on account of, according to; الصحة من له اساس ال (asāsa, ṣiḥḥa) completely unfounded (news, rumor)
اساسي asāsī fundamental, basic; elementary; essential; principal, chief,
main│اسود حجر (ḥajar) cornerstone, foundation stone
اساسيات asāsīyāt fundamentals, principles
تأسيس ta'sīs founding, foundation, establishment, setting up, institution; grounding, laying of the substructure (arch.); pl. -āt facilities, utilities; institutions
تأسيس ta'sīsī founding; foundational, fundamental│ تأسيسي مجلس (majlis) constituent assembly
مؤسس mu'assis founder
مؤسسة mu’assasa pl. -āt foundation, establishment; firm (com.); institution; organization
االسبان al-asbān, al-isbān the Spaniards
اسباني isbānī Spanish; (pl. -ūn) Spaniard
اسبانخ isbānaḳ spinach
Spain isbāniyā اسبانيا
اسبداج isbidāj and اسبيداج isbīdāj white lead, ceruse
اسبرتو (It. spirito) isbirto alcohol
اسبليطة isbalīṯa epaulet
ست  see است
استاتيكي istātīkī static (el.)
استاد (Fr. stade) istād stadium
استاذ ustād pl. اساتذة asātida master; teacher; professor (academic title); form of address to intellectuals (lawyers, journalists, officials, writers and poets); ledger (com.)│ األعظم االستاذ (a‘ẓam) Grand Master (of a lodge); األكبر االستاذ title of the Rector of Al Azhar University; كرسي استاذ (kursī; Eg.) and بكرسي استاذ (Syr.) full professor; كرسي بال استاذ (Syr.) associate professor; متفرغ استاذ (mutafarrig;Eg.) part- time professor (holding an office outside the university); مساعد استاذ (musā‘id) assistant professor (Eg.; Syr.); زائر استاذ (Eg.; Syr.) visiting professor; الجدل في اساتذة (jadal) they are masters of disputation
استاذية ustādīya mastership; professorship, professorate
استانبول istanbūl  Istanbul, Constantinople
 استانبولي istanbūlī of Istanbul
al-istāna al-astāna, االستانة al-āsitāna, اآلستانة
Constantinople, Istanbul استبرق istabraq brocade استراتيجي istrātījī strategic استرالي usturālī Australian
استراليا usturālīyā Australia
pound جنيه استرليني sterling│ istarlīnī استرليني al-i. minṯaqat منطقة االسترليني sterling; area sterling
امر see استمارة
استوبة (It. stoppa) tow, oakum; cotton waste
استوديوھات pl. istūdiyō studio) (It.-Engl. استوديو
istūdiyōhāt studio; atelier استوكھولم istokholm Stockholm استونيا (Engl.) istōniyā Estonia
استياتيت I istiyātīt steatite, soapstone (min.)
اسوج look up alphabetically
اسد X to display the courage of a lion (على against)
اسد asad pl. اسد usud, usd, اسود usūd, آساد āsād lion; Leo (astron.)│ االسد داء leontiasis (med.)
 اسر asara i (asr) to bind, fetter, shackle, chain (ه s.o.); to capture, take prisoner (ه s.o.); to captivate, fascinate, hold spellbound (ه s.o.), absorb, arrest (ھ the attention) X to surrender, give s.o. up as prisoner
اسر asr (leather) strap, thong; capture; captivity│االسر شدة šiddat al-a. vigor, energy
اسرة usra pl. اسر usar, -āt family; dynasty; clan, kinsfolk, relatives; -- asirra see سرير
باسره bi-asrihī entirely, completely, altogether, باسرھم جاءوا all of them came, they came one and all
اسار isār (leather) strap, thong; captivity; captivation, enthrallment│ اساره في وقع to be subjected to s.th., fall into the clutches of s.th.
اسير asīr pl. اسراء usarā , اسرى asrā, اسارى asārā prisoner, captive, prisoner of war
اسيرة asīra pl. -āt female prisoner, slave girl
آسر āsir winning, captivating, fascinating; captor
مأسور ma’sūr captivated, fascinated, enthralled (ب by)
سرير see asirra اسرة 
 مأسورة look up alphabetically
the i. banū بنو اسرائيل Israel│ isrā’īl  اسرائيل of State the i. daulat دولة اسرائيلية Israelites; Israel
اسرائيلي isrā’īlī Israelitish; Israelite;
Israeli (adj, and n.); اسرائيليات Judaica
اسرافيل isrāfīl   Israfil, the angel who will sound the trumpet on the day of Resurrection
اسرب usrub lead (metal)
اسطانبول isṯanbūl  Istanbul, Constantinople
اسطبل isṯabl pl. -āt stable, barn
اسطبة (It. stoppa) usṯubba tow, oakum
اسطرالب asṯurlāb astrolabe
اسطقس isṯaqīs pl. -āt element
اسطوانات usṯuwāna pl. -āt column (arch.); cylinder (math.; of an engine); phonograph record; -- pl. اساطين asāṯīn  high-ranking, prominent personalities; stars, celebrities, authorities, masters (e.g., of art: الفن اساطين a. al-fann)
اسطوانى usṯuwānī cylindric(al)
اسطورة usṯūra pl. اساطير asāṯīr legend, fable, tale, myth, saga
اسطوري usṯūrī fabulous, mythical, legendary
اسطول usṯūl pl. اساطيل asāṯīl  fleet; squadron
□ اسطى usṯā (colloq. for استاذ) pl. اسطوات usṯawāt master; foreman, overseer; also form of address to those in lower callings, e.g., to a cab driver, coachman, etc.
اسف asifa a (asaf) to regret (على or ل s.th.), feel sorry (على for), be sad (على about) V do
اسف asaf grief, sorrow, chagrin, regret│ وا اسفاه! wā asafāh! Oh, what a pity! it's too bad! لالسف ويا wa-yā lal-asafi (or only
 بكل اسف and مع االسف unfortunately; )لالسف
bi-kulli asafin do.
اسف asifa and اسيف asīf regretful, sorry, sad, grieved, distressed
تأسف ta'assuf regret
آسف āsif regretful, sorry, sad│ غير تركته آسف (gaira āsifin) I left him without regret,
I was only too glad to leave him
عليه مأسوف ma’sūf ‘alaihi mourned (esp. of a dead person, = the late lamented)
مؤسف mu’sif distressing, sad, regrettable
متأسف muta’assif sad, sorry, regretful;
sorry! !متأسف
اسفاناخ isfānāk and اسفانخ isfānaḳ spinach│ رومي اسفاناخ (rūmī) garden orach (Atriplex hortensis, bot.)
اسفلت asfalt asphalt
اسفنج isfanj,isfunj sponge
اسفنجي isfanjī spongy; porous
اسفندان isfindān maple (bot.) اسفيداج isfīdāj; white lead, ceruse اسفين isfīn pl. اسافين asāfīn  wedge
(maraḍ)   مرض اسقربوطي isqarbūṯī:   اسقربوطي
scurvy (med.)
asāqif  اساقف asāqifa, اساقفة pl. usquf اسقف
archbishop رئيس االساقفة bishop│
اسقفي usqufī Episcopal
اسقفية usqufīya episcopate, bishopric اسقمري usqumrī, isqumrī mackerel (zool.) اسقيل isqīl an Oriental variety of sea onion
(Scilla)
اسكتش (Engl.) isketš sketch
اسكتلندا iskotlandā Scotland
اسكتلندي iskotlandī Scottish, Scotch
اسكلة iskila pl. اساكل asākil  seaport, commercial center (in the East)
اسكملة iskamla stool, footstool
اسكندرونة iskandarūna  Iskenderon (formerly Alexandretta, seaport in S Turkey)
االسكندرية al-iskandarīya Alexandria (city in N Egypt)
اسكندينافيا iskandināfīya Scandinavia
اسل II to sharpen, point, taper (ھ s.th.)
اسل asal (coll.) rush (bot.)
اسلة asaIa pl. -āt thorn, spike, prong; point (also, e.g., of a pen = nib); tip of the tongue
the al-asalīya al-ḥurūf الحروف االسلية ص and ز، س letters
اسيل asīl smooth│ اسيل خد (ḳadd) smooth cheek
اسالة asāla eliptic, oval form
مؤسل mu’assal pointed, tapered
of islāmbūlī )استانبولي of (variant اسالمبولي Istanbul
اسالنده islandā Iceland
سم  see اسم
اسمانجوني asmanjūnī sky-blue, azure, cerulean اسمره asmara Asmara (capital of Eritrea) اسمنت asmant, ismant cement
اسمنتي asmantī cement (adj.)
اسن asana i u and asina a to become brackish (water)
آسن āsin brackish
(اسو and اسا (اسى asā u (asw, اسا asan) to nurse, treat (ھ a wound); to make peace (بين between, among); -- اسى asiya (اسا اسى، asan) to be sad, grieved, distressed II to console, comfort (ه s.o.); to nurse (ه a patient) III to share (one’s worldly possessions, ه with s.o.), be charitable (ه to s.o.); to assist, support (ه s.o.); to console, comfort (ه s.o.); to treat, cure (ھ s.th., medically) V to be consoled, find solace VI to share the worldly possessions; to assist one another, give mutual assistance
اسى asan grief, sorrow, distress
اسوة uswa, iswa example, model, pattern│ب اسوة uswatan bi following the model or pattern of; along the lines of; in the same manner as, just as, like
مأساة ma’sāh pl. مآس ma’āsin trogedy, drama
تأسية ta’siya consolation, comfort
مواساة muwāsāh (for mu’āsāh) consolation; charity; beneficence
 أساورة asāwir , أساور pl. uswār iswār, أسوار
asāwira bracelet, bangle
أسوان aswān Aswan (city in S Egypt)
اسوج asūj Sweden
اسوجي asūjī Swedish
اسو see اسى
Asia (ṣugrā) آسيا الصغرى Asia│ āsiyā آسيا Minor
آسيوي āsiyawī Asiatic, Asian (adj. and n.)
اسيوط asyūt  Asyūt (city in central Egypt)
اشب V to be mixed, heterogeneous, motley (a crowd)
اشابة ušāba pl. اشائب ašā’ib  mixed, motley crowd
اشببيلية išbīliya  Seville (city in SW Spain)
شبن see اشابين pl. išbīn اشبين
اشر ašara u (ašr) to sow (ھ s.th.); -- i to file, sharpen with a file (ھ s.th.) II to mark, indicate, state, enter, record (ھ s.th.); to grant a visa; to provide with a visa (على s.th.)
اشر ašar liveliness, high spirits, exuberance; wildness; insolence, impertinence
اشر ašir lively, sprightly, in high spirits, exuberant; wild; insolent, impertinent, arrogant
saw mawāšīr  مواشير pl. minšār مئشار
تأشير ta’šīr issuance of an official endorsement; official endorsement; visa
t. تأشيرة مرور visa│ -āt pl. ta’šīra تأشيرة visa transit تأشيرة اجتياز or murūr
مؤشر mu’aššir indicator, needle (of a measuring instrument)
مؤشر mu’aššar jagged, serrated; marked, designated (ب by, with)
اشفى išfā pl. اشاف ašāfin awl, punch
اشنان ušnān potash; saltwort (Salsola kali; bot.)
اشنة ušna moss
اشور ašūr Assyria
اشوري ašūrī Assyrian (adj. and n.)
اصيص aṣīṣ pl. اصص uṣūṣ flowerpot
اصد II to close, shut (a door, etc.)
اصر iṣr pl. آصار āṣār covenant, compact, contract; load, encumbrance, burden; sin; pl. آصار bonds, ties
آصرة āṣira pl. اواصر awāṣir  bond, tie (fig. e.g., الوالء اواصر a. al-walā’i bonds of friendship); obligation, commitment
اصطبل iṣṯabl pl. -āt stable, barn
اصفھان iṣfahān  Isfahan (city in W central Iran)
اصل aṣula u (اصالة aṣala) to be or become firmly rooted; to be firmly established; to be of noble origin II to found (ھ s.th.), give s.th. (ھ) a firm foundation, establish the foundation or origin of (ھ) V to be or become firmly rooted, deep-rooted, ingrained; to take root, be or become firmly established; to derive one's origin ( من from) X to uproot, root out, extirpate, exterminate, annihilate (ھ s.th.); to remove (ھ an organ by a surgical operation)│ شأفته استأصل(ša’fatahū) to eradicate s.th., eliminate s.th. radically
اصل pl. اصول root; trunk (of a tree); origin, source; cause, reason; descent, lineage, stock (esp., one of a noble character); foundation, fundament, basis; the origins! (e.g., of s book); pl. اصول principles, fundamentals, rudiments, elements (e.g., of a science); rules; basic rules, principles, axioms; real estate, landed property; assets (fin.); -- اصال aṣlan originally, primarily; (with neg.) by no means, not at all, not in the least│األصل في originally, at first; اصول الفقه u. al-fiqh the 4 foundations of Islamic jurisprudence, i.e., Koran, Sunna, qiyās (analogy) and ijmā‘ (consensus); اصول وخصوم assets and liabilities; مضاعفة اصول (muḍā‘afa) double-entry bookkeeping; األصول حسب (ḥasaba) properly, in conformity with regulations
اصلي original, primary, primal, initial; genuine, authentic, pure; basic, fundamental, principel, chief, main│ الثمن األصلي (taman) cost price; األصلية الجھات (jihāt) the cardinal points (of the compass); اصلي عدد (‘adad) cardinal number; اصلي عضو (‘uḍw) regular member
 اصولي uṣūlī in accordance with the rules, conforming to prevailing principles; traditional, usual; legist
اصيل pl. اصالء uṣalā’  of pure, noble origin; original, authentic, genuine; pure; proper, actual; firm, solid; sound, reasonable, sensible; of strong, unswerving character; steadfast; deep- rooted; native, indigenous│ األصيل األصل the actual reason; الرأي اصيل of sound, unerring judgment
اصيل pl. آصال āṣāl, اصائل aṣā’il  time before sunset, late afternoon
اصالة aṣāla firmness, steadfastness, strength of character; nobility of descent, purity of origin; aṣālatan immediately, directly, personally│ الرأي اصالة a. ar-ra’y clarity and firmness of judgment; judiciousness; نفسه عن باالصالة spontaneously, of one's own accord, in one's own name, personally, privately (as opposed to ونيابة اصال ؛(غيره عن بالنيابة aṣālatan wa-niyābatan directly and indirectly
تأصيلة ta’ṣīla pedigree, genealeogy تأصل ta’aṣṣu1 deep-rootedness استئصال isti’ṣāl extirpation,
extermination, (radical) elimination; removal by surgery
متأصل muta’aṣṣil deep-rooted, deep- seated; chronic (illness)
اطيط aṯīṯ the mooning bray of a camel
 اطر aṯara i u (aṯr) and II to bend, curve (ھ s.th.)
اطار iṯār pl. -āt, اطرuṯur frame (also, of eyeglasses); tire (of a wheel); hoop (of a barrel, etc.)
اطارة iṯāra rim, felly (of a wheel)
اطاري iṯārī framelike, hoop-shaped
طرى see اطرية 
اطرغلة uṯrugulla a variety of pigeon
نطرون = aṯrūn اطرون
the al-aṯlanṯīq al-aṯlantīk, االطالنتيك، االطالنطيك Atlantic
Atlantic aṯlanṯī اطالنطي and aṯlanṯīqī اطالنطيكي
اطلس aṯlas  satin; (pl. اطالس aṯālis  atlas, volume of geographical maps
اطلسي aṯlasī Atlantic
theالحلف االطلنطي Atlantic│ aṯlanṯī اطلنطي Pact Atlantic
اطوم aṯūm sea turtle
اغا agā, آغا āgā pl. اغوات agawāt aga, lord, master, sir; eunuch, harem chamberlain
االغريق al-igrīq, االغارقة al-agāriqa the Greeks اغريقي igrīqī Greek, Grecian (adj. and n.) اغسطس agustus August (month)
اف V to grumble, mutter in complaint (من about)
اف uff dirt (in the ears or under the nails), earwax, cerumen
اف uff interj. expressing anger or displeasure
افف afaf displeasure; grumbling, grumble
بالد Europeans│ the Franks, the al-ifranj االفرنج Europe االفرنج
افرنجي ifranjī European
French the االفرنسية French; ifransī افرنسي French the االفرنسيون language;
افريز ifrīz pl. افاريز afārīz  frieze; edge; curb; sidewalk│المحطة افريز i. al-maḥaṯṯa platform (of a railroad station); الحائط افريز molding (arch.)
افريقا afrīqā f. and افريقيا ifrīqiyā, now usually pronounced afrīqiyā f. Africa│ افريقيا الشمالية (šamālīya) North Africa
افريقي ifrīqī, now usually pronounced afrīqī African; (pl. -ūn, افارقة afāriqa) an African
آفرين āfirīn bravo! well done!
افسنتين ifsantīn, ifsintīn wormwood, absinthe (Artemisia absinthium; bot.)
افشين ifšīn pl. افاشين afāšīn  litany (Chr.)
االفغان al-afgān the Afghans; Afghanistan افغانستان afgānistān Afghanistan افغاني afgānī Afghan (adj. and n.)
افق ufq, ufuq pl. آفاق āfāq horizon; range of vision, field of vision; pl. distant lands,
 faraway countries, remote regions; provinces, interior of the country (as distinguished from the capital)│ األرض آفاق
a. al-arḍ the remotest parts of the earth; البالد آفاق a. al-bilād the outlying portions of the country; اآلفاق شذاذ šuddad al-a. foreigners, travelers
افقي ufqī horizontal
آفاقي āfāqī coming from a distant country or region
افاق affāq wandering, roving, roaming; tramp, vagabond
افك afaka i (afk) and afika a (ifk, afk, afak, افوك
ufūk) to lie, tell a lie
افك ifk and افيكة afīka pl. افائك afā’ik  lie, untruth, falsehood
افاك affak liar, lying
افل afala u i (افول ufūl) to go down, set (stars)
افول ufūl setting (of stars)
آفل āfil transitory, passing
Plato aflāṯūn  افالطون
افن afan stupidity
افين afīn and مأفون ma’fūn stupid, foolish, fatuous; fool
افندي afandī pl. -īya gentleman (when referring to non-Europeans wearing Western clothes and the tarboosh); (after the name) a title of respect (eg.); افندم! afandim! Sir! (eg.) afandim? (I beg your) pardon? What did you say? 20
افوكاتو (It. avvocato) avokātō advocate, lawyer, attorney│العمومي االفوكاتو representative of the attorney general (= Fr. avocat général)
laudanum al-a. روح االفيونopium│ afyūn افيون
اقة uqqa pl. -āt oka, a weight, in Eg. = 1.24s kg, in Syr. = 1.2s2 kg
وقت see مؤقت
daisy aqāḥī اقاحى pl. uqhūwān اقحوان
اقرباذين aqrabādīn composite medicament│ علم االقرباذين ‘ilm al-a. pharmaceutics, pharmacology
اقرباذيني aqrabādīnī pharmaceutic(al)
اقيط aqīṯ cottage cheese
اقليد iqlīd look up alphabetically
اقلم aqlama to acclimate, acclimatize, adapt, adjust II ta'aqlama to acclimatize (o.s.)
اقليم iqlīm pl. اقاليم aqiilim  climate; area, region; province, district; administrative district (Eg.; = االقاليم ;(مديرية country, provinces (as distinguished from the city)
اقليمي iqlīmī climatic; regional, local; territorial│االقليمية المياه  (miyāh) territorial waters
key aqālīd  اقاليد pl. iqlīd اقليد
اقليدس iqlīdis Euclid
اقنوم uqnūm pl. اقانيم aqānīm  hypostasis, divine person within the Trinity (Chr.); constitutive element
اقونة (Gr. είκών) iqūna icon (Chr.)
اقيانوسية uqyanūsiya Oceania اكادى akkādī Akkadian اكاديمية akādīmīya academy اكتوبر okctober October
اكد II to assure (ل ھ s.o. of, ان that); to give assurance (ل ھ s.o. of); to confirm (ھ s.th. a view) V to be or become convinced, convince o.s. (من s.th.); to reassure o.s., make sure (من of s.th.); to be sure (من of); to be urgent, imperative, requisite
تأكيد ta'kīd pl. -āt assurance; confirmation; emphasis; بالتأكيد most certainly! of course!
تأكد ta’akkud assurance, reassurance
أكيد akīd certain, sure; firm (resolve); definite (desire); urgent, imperative (need); أكيدا akīdan certainly! surely!
مؤكد mu’akkad certain, definite, sure; confirmed
متأكد muta'akkid convinced (من of)
  اكر akara i (akr) to plow, till, cultivate (ھ the land)
اكار akkār pl. -ūn, اكرة akara plowman   اكرة ukra pl. اكر ukar ball (for playing) اكزيما ekzēmā eczema (med.)
اكس اشعة aši‘‘at iks X-rays
extra اكسترا
اكسجين oksižēn oxygen
 اكسير iksīr elixir
كف see akuff اكف
اكل akala u (akl, مأكل ma’kal) to eat (ھ s.th.); to eat up, consume, swallow, devour, destroy (ھ s.th.); to eat, gnaw (ھ at), 21 eat away, corrode, erode (ھ s.th.); to spend unlawfully (ھ s.th.). enrich o.s. feather one's nest (ھ with)│ وشرب الدھر عليه اكل (dahru, šariba) to be old and worn out, be timeworn; الربا اكل (ribā) to take usurious interest; الكتف تؤكل اين من يعلم ya‘lamu min aina tu’kalu l-katif he knows how to tackle the matter properly; جلده اكله (j
اكل في الصحن itched; skin his lduhū)ه
(ṣaḥn) to eat off a plate; حقه اكل (ḥaqqahū)
to encroach upon s.o.’s right II and IV to give s.o. (ه) s.th. (ھ) to eat, feed (ه ھ s.o. s.th.) III to eat, dine (ه with s.o.) V to be devoured, be consumed; to be eaten away, corrode, undergo corrosion; to become old, worn, timeworn, full of cracks; to be destroyed by corrosion VI = V
اكل akl food; meal, repast; fodder, feed│ االكل غرفةgurfat al-a. dining room; (eg.) اكل البحر a. al-baḥr land washed away by the sea or the Nile (as opposed to البحر طرح)
اكل ukul, ukl food; fruit│ اكله آتى to bear fruit
اكلة akla pl. akalāt meal, repast; -- ukla
bite, morsel
○	اكال ukāl prurigo, itch eruption
(med.)
اكال akkāl, اكيل akīl, اكول akūl voracious, gluttonous; hearty eater, gourmand, glutton
مأكل ma’kal pl. مآكل ma’ākil  food, eats
تأكل ta’akkul wear; corrosion; erosion
(geol.)
تآكل ta’ākul wear; corrosion; erosion
(geol.)
ائتكل i’tikāl erosion (geol.)
آكل ākil eater
آكلة ākila gangrenous sore
مأكول ma’kūl eatable, edible; pl. مأكوالت food, foodstuffs, eatables, edibles
مؤاكل mu’ākil table companion
متأكل muta’akkil and متآكل muta’ākil corroded; eroded; worn, timeworn; full of cracks; rusty, rust-eaten
اكليروس iklīrūs clergy (Chr.) اكليروسية iklīrūsīya clericalism اكليركي iklīrikī cleric(al)
اكلينيكي iklīnīkī clinical
اكمة akama pl. -āt, اكام ikām, اكم ukum, آكام ākām (coll. اكم akam) hill; reef; heap, pile│ وراءھا ما االكمة وراء (warā’a) something's fishy! there is more to it than meets the eye
ال ill pact, covenant; blood relationship, consanguinity
  اال a-lā and اما a-mā see│a
الو  see alāاال  
  اال allā (= ال ان an lā) lest, that ... not, in order that ... not, so as not to
  اال illā (=ل ان in lā) unless if not; except, save; (after negation:) only, but, not until│ان اال illā anna except that ..., yet, however, nevertheless (also introducing main clauses); اذا اال illā idā unless, if not; except when; واال wa-illā (and if not =) otherwise, orelae; وھو اال illā wa-huwa (with a preceding negation) unless he ..., except that he ... ; ان اال ھي وما wa-mā hiya illā an (with following verb in perf.) it was not long until ... ; presently, forthwith; ھي وما حتى ... ان اال wa-ma hiya illā an ... ḥattā no sooner had he ... than .... e.g.	أن اال ھي فما
فعل حتى ھم (hamma) he had no sooner made his plan than he carried it out
االسكا alaska Alaska
االى alay and آالى ālay pl. -āt regiment 22
  الب alaba u i (alb) to gather, join forces, rally II to incite (ه على s.o. against) V to rally, band together, plot, conspire (على against)
  االلب جبال jibal al-alb the Alps
االلبان al-albān the Albanians
البانيا albāniyā Albania
الخ abbreviation of آخره الى ilā āḳirihī and so on, etc.
الذى alladī f. التى allatī, pl. m. الذين alladīna f.
allā’ī الالئى allawātī, اللواتى allātī, الالتى
 (relative pronoun) he who, that which; who, which, that│والتى اللتيا بعد ba‘da l- lutayyā wa-llatī after lengthy discussions, after much ado
الزاس (Fr. Alsace) alzās  Alsace (region of NE France)
الس II to belittle, disparage (على s.o.)
 الف alf pl. الوف ulūf, آالف ālāf thousand; millennium│مؤلف الوف (mu’allafa) or آالف مؤلفة thousands and thousands; عشرات االلوف ašarāt al-u. tens of thousands; مآت االلوف mi’āt al-u. hundreds of thousands
الفى alfī: الفى عيد (‘īd) millennial celebration, millenary
 الف alif name of the letter│يائه الى الفه من from beginning to end, from A to Z; الفه يعرف وياءه (wa-yā’ahū) he knows it from A to Z; باء الف ABC
  الف alifa a (alf) to be acquainted, familiar, conversant (ھ with s.th.); to be on intimate terms (ه with s.o.); to be or get accustomed, used, habituated (ھ to); to like (ھ s.th.), be fond of (ھ); to become tame II to accustom, habituate (ه ھ s.o. to s.th.); to tame, domesticate (ھ an animal); to form (ھ e,g., a committee, a government); to unite, join, combine, put together (بين different things); to compile, compose, write (ھ a book) V to be composed, be made up, consist (من of); to be united, be combined VI to be attuned to each other, be in tune, be in harmony; to harmonize (مع with) VIII to be united, be linked, be connected; to be on familiar, intimate terms (ب with); to form a. coalition (pol.); to fit, سuit (مع s.th.), go well, agree, harmonize (مع with); to be well-ordered, neat, tidy X to seek the intimacy, court the friendship (ه of s.o.)
الف ilf pl. االف ullāf intimate; close friend, intimate, confidant; lover
الف ulfa familiarity, intimacy; friendship, love, affection; union, concord, harmony, congeniality
اليف alīf familiar, intimate; tame, domesticated (animal); friendly, amicable, genial; (pl. االئف alā’if ) intimate, close friend, associate, companion
الوف alūf familiar, intimate; tame, domesticated (animal); attached, devoted, faithful
مألف ma'laf object of familiarity
تأليف ta’līf formation (e.g., of a government); union, junction, combination (بين of separate things); literary work; composition, compilation, writing (of a book, of an article); (pl. تآليف ta’ālīf , تواليف) work, book, publication
تآلف ta’āluf harmony; familiarity, intimacy, mutual affection; comradeship, camaraderie
ائتالف I’tilāf concord, harmony; agreement (مع with); union; coalition, entente (pol.)
ائتالفي I’tilāfī coalition- (in  compounds)│ ائتالفية وزارة coalition cabinet
الف ma’lūf familiar, accustomed; usual, customary; custom, usage 23
مؤلف mu’allif pl. -ūn author, writer; -- mu’allaf composed, consisting, made up ( من of); written, compiled; (pl. -āt) book, publication; see also  الف alf
متآلف muta’ālif harmonious
الق alaqa i, (alq) to shine, radiate, flash, glitter, glisten V and VIII do.
الق alaq brightness, brilliance
االق allāq bright, shining, brilliant, radiant; glittering, flashing, sparkling
تألق ta’alluq glow, radiance, effulgence
متألق mula’alliq bright, shining, brilliant, radiant
الكتروني elektrōnī electronic│الكتروني عقل (‘aql) electronic computer
 الم alima a (alam) to be in pain, feel pain; to suffer (y from s.th.) II and IV to cause pain or suffering (ه to s.o.), pain, ache, hurt (ه s.o.) V = I; to complain
الم alam pl. آالم ālām pain, ache, suffering, agony│نفسانية آالم (nafsānīya) mental agony; اآلالم اسبوع usbū‘ al-a.
Passion Week (Chr.)
اليم alīm aching, sore; sad, grievous, painful, excruciating; hurting
 تألم ta’allum sensation of pain, pain, ache
مؤلم mu’allim aching, painful; sad, grievous, distressing
متألم muta’allim aching, painful; in pain, suffering, deeply afflicted; tormented
الى see ilā-mā االم  
الماس almās (al sometimes interpreted as definite article) diamond
االلمان al-almān the Germans
المان -ūn, (pl. German; almānī الماني
almān) a German
المانيا almāniyā Germany
المانية almānīya German character or characteristics, Germanity
اله II to deify (ه s.o.), make a god of s.o. (ه) V to become a deity, a godhead; to deify o.s.
االه ,اله ilāh pl. آلھة āliha god, deity, godhead
االھة ilaha pl. -āt goddess
االھي الھي، ilāhī divine, of God; theological; االالھيات al-ilāhīyāt theological, spiritual concerns االالھيات علم ‘i1m al-i. theology
ﷲ allāh Allah, God (as the One and Only)│<I درك li-llāh darruka exclamation of admiration and praise, see در
اللھم allāhumma O God!│ اال اللھم (illā) unless, were it not that, except that, or at best (after a negative statement); اذا اللھم (idā) at least if or when; if only; نعم اللھم (na‘am) by God, yes! Most certainly!
الوھية ulūhīya divine power, divinity
تأليه ta’līh deification, apotheosis
آله ālih (pagan) god
آلھة āliha pl. -āt goddess
آلھي ālihī divine
متأله muta’allih divine, heavenly
الھوت see etc., الالھوت
 ( االال(آلو alā u to neglect or fail to do, not to do (في s.th.), desist, refrain (في from s.th.)│ في جھدا يألو ال(jahdan) he will go to any length, he spares no effort, goes out of his way for IV to swear│ان نفسه على آلى he promised himself that he ...
oath īlā’ ايالء
 آلو (Fr. hallo) hello!
aluminyom الومنيوم and alūminyā الومنيا
aluminum 24
 الى ilā (prep.) to, toward; up to, as far as; till, until; ان الى (conj.) until│آخره الى (āḳirihī) and so forth, et cetera; ذلك الى besides, moreover, furthermore, in addition to that; غد الى till tomorrow! الى اللقاء (liqā’) good- by! االم ilāma (= ما الى) up to where! how far! متى الى till when! how long! عني اليك (‘annī) get away from me! away with you! ذلك جانب الى (jānibi d.) besides, moreover, in addition to that; ان الى ھذا moreover, furthermore; ذلك غير الى (gair d.) and the like; اليه وما and the like, et cetera; اليه ومن اليھم)) (wa-man) and other people like that; اليك (addressing the reader) now here you have ... ; here is (are) ... ; following is (are) ..., e.g., ما القارئ والى in the following, the reader will find what ... ; عبراني اسلوب العربية الى (uslūb ‘ibrānī) a style of Hebrew approximating Arabic; ذاك الى وال ھذا الى ال neither this way nor that way, belonging to neither group; اليك االمر it’s up to you, the decision is yours
  آالالء(pl. of الى ilan) benefits, blessings
 الية alya, ilya pl. alayāt fat tail (of a sheep); buttock
الياذة iliyāda Iliad
 ام am or? (introducing the second member of an alternative question)
 امة ama pl. اماء imā’, اموات amawāt bondmaid, slave girl
 ام amma u (amm) to go, betake o.s., repair (ھ to a place), go to see (ه s.o.); -- (امامة imāma) to lead the way, lead by one’s example (ه s.i.); to lead (ه s.o.) in prayer; -- (امومة umūma) to be or become a mother II to nationalize (ھ s.th.) V to go, betake o.s. repair (ھ to a place), go to see (ه s.o.) VIII to follow the example (ب of s.o.)
ام umm pl. امھات ummahāt mother; source, origin; basis, foundation; original, original version (of a book); the gist, essence of s.th.; pl. امھات matrix (typ.)│ الحبر ام u. al- ḥibr cuttlefish squid; الحسن ام u. al-ḥasan (magr.) nightingale; الخلول ام u. al-ḳulūl river mussel (zool.); درمان ام u. durmān
 Omdurman (city in central Sudan, opposite Khartoum); الراس ام u. ar-ra's skull, brain; cerebral membrane, meninges; واربعين اربع ام u. arba‘ wa- arba‘īn centipede; شملة ام u. šamla(ta) this world, the worldly pleasures; العين بام bi-u. l-‘ain or عينه بام with one’s own eyes; ام القرآن and القرآن ام the first sura of the Koran; القرى ام u. al-qura Mecca; الكتاب ام also: the original text of the Book from which Koranic revelation derives; the uncontested portions of the Koran; الوطن ام
امھات metropolis; capital, al-waṯan u. امھات events; important most the الحوادث main the امھات المسائل (typ.); matrix الحروف virtues principal the امھات المسائل problems;
امة umma pl. امم umam nation, people; generation│محمد امة Mohammed's community, the Mohammedans; االمم المتحدة (muttaḥida) the United Nations
امي ummī maternal, motherly; illiterate uneducated; (pl. -ūn) an illiterate
امية ummīya ignorance; illiteracy; see also under  اموى
اممي umamī international
امومة umūma motherhood; motherliness, maternity
امام amāma (prep.) in front of; in the presence of│االمام الى (amāmi) to the front, forward, onward, ahead; ان اال يكن لم (illā an) he had no other alternative but to ... ; امامه وقف (waqafa) to oppose, resist, stop, check s.th.
امامى amāmī front, fore-, anterior, forward, foremost│امامية نقطة (nuqṯa) outpost 25
امام imām pl. ائمة a’imma imam, prayer leader; leader; master; plumb line
امامة imāma imamah, function or office of the prayer leader; imamate; leading position; precedence
تأميم ta’mīm pl. -āt nationalization
 اما a-mā see│a
 اما ammā (with foll . ف fa) as to, as for, as far as... is concerned; but; yet, however, on the other hand│بعد اما  (ba‘du) (a formular phrase linking introduction and actual
subject of a book or letter, approx.:) now
 beginning;
 some for (amrin)الالمر ما
then …, now to our topic: ...
 اما immā if; واما -- اما be it -- or, either – or (also او -- اما)
emperor imbrāṯūr امبراطور
امبراطوري imbrāṯūrī imperialist(ic)
امبراطورية imbrātūrīya empire, imperium; imperialism
امبير ambīr pl. امابير amābīr  ampere (el.)
انبيق = imbiq امبيق
امت amt crookedness, curvedness, curvation, curvature; weakness
امد amad pl. آماد āmād end, terminus, extremity; period, stretch or span of time, time; distance│بعيد امد منذ for a long time (past); االمد قصير short-dated; of short duration, short-lived; short-term
امر amara u (amr) to order, command, bid, instruct (ه s.i. ب to do s.th.), commission, charge, entrust (ه s.o. ب with s.th. or to do s.th.); -- amara, amura u (امارة imāra) to become an emir II to invest with authority, make an emir (ه s.o., على over) III to ask
s.o. 's (ه) advice, consult (ه s.o.) V to come to power; to set o.s. up as lord and master; to behave like an emir; to assume an imperious attitude; to be imperious, domineering VI to take counsel, deliberate together, confer, consult with each other; to plot, conspire (على against) VIII to deliberate, take counsel) (ب about); to conspire, plot, hatch a plot (ب against s.o.)│ بامره ائتمر to carry out s.o.’s orders
امر amr 1. pl. اوامر awāmir  order, command, instruction (ب to do s.th.); ordinance, decree; power, authority; (gram.) imperative│ عال امر (‘ālin) royal decree (formerly, Eg.); علي امر (‘alīy) decree, edict of the Bey (formerly, Tun.); قانوني امر ordinance having the force of law (Tun.); والنھي االمر (wa-nnahy) pl. االوامر والنواھي (lit.: command and interdiction, i.e.) sovereign power; full power(s), supreme authority; توريد امر (delivery) order (com.); امرك تحت at your disposal, at your service. -- 2. pl. امور umūr matter, affair, concern, business│واقع امر (accomplished) fact; معروف امر common knowledge; االمر اول في at first, in the
 reason or other; كذلك االمر اليس isn't it so? اما كذلك واالمر (ammā wa-l-amru) things being as they are, there will, no doubt, ...; مھما امر من يكن (min amrin) whatever may happen; however things may be; بين ھو امرين he has two possibilities (or alternatives); الذى االمر which (introducing a relative clause the antecedent of which is another clause); امره قضى qudiya amruhu it's all over with him; in the latter and similar phrases, امره is a frequent paraphrase of "he"
امر immar simple-minded, stupid
امرة imra power, influence, authority, command│امرته under his command
امارة amāra pl. -āt, امائر amā’ir  sign, token, indication, symptom, mark, characteristic 26
امارة imāra position or rank of an emir; princely bearing or manners; principality, emirate; authority, power│البحر امارة i. al- baḥr office or jurisdiction of an admiral, admiralty; عمان ساحل امارات (i. s. ‘ummān)
Trucial Oman
امير amīr pl. امراء umarā’ commander; prince, emir; title of princes of a ruling house; tribal chief│ االى امير(alay) commander of a regiment (formerly, Eg.; approx.: colonel; as a naval rank, approx.: captain); االمراء امير approx.: major general (Tun.); البحار امير (Eg. 1939) approx.: admiral, البحار امراء كبير (Eg. 1939) approx.: fleet admiral; البحر امير a. al-baḥr admiral (when referring to a non-Arab officer of this rank; Eg. 1939 approx.: vice-admiral); االكبر البحر امير or البحار امير االعظم fleet admiral (when referring to a non-Arab officer of this rank); اللواء امير a.
al-liwā’ (Ir., since 1933) brigadier; لواء امير العسة a. l. al-‘assa commandant of the Bey's palace guard (formerly, Tun.); امير المؤمنين a. al-mu’minīn Commander of the Faithful, Caliph
اميرة amīr pl. -āt princess
اميري amīrī (and □ ميري mīrī) goverment(a1), state-owned, state, public│ اميري ارض (arḍ) government land (Syr.); االميرية المطبعة government press
امار ammār constantly urging, always demanding (ب to do s.th.); inciting, instigating│ بالسوء االمارة النفس (nafs, sū’) the baser self (of man) that incites to evil
تأمور ta’mūr soul, mind, spirit; pericardium (anat.)│التأمور التھاب pericarditis (med.)
مؤامرة mu’āmara pl. -āt deliberation, counsel, conference; plot, conspiracy
تأمر ta’ammur imperiousness, domineeringness; imperious deportment, overbearing manners
تآمر ta’āmur joint consultation, counsel, deliberation, conference; plot, conspiracy
ائتمار i’timār deliberation, counsel, conference; plot, conspiracy
استئمارة isti’māra (frequently written
blank form, )استمارة
آمر āmir commander; lord, master; orderer, purchaser, customer, client│ اآلمر الناھى absolute master, vested with unlimited authority
مأمور ma’mūr commissioned, charged; commissioner; civil officer, official, esp., one in executive capacity; the head of a markaz and qism (Eg.)│ البوليس مأمور commissioner of police; التفلسة مأمور (taflīsa) receiver (in bankruptcy; jur.); مأمور m. al-ḥaraka traffic manager (railroad); التصفية مأمور m. al-taṣfīya receiver (in equity, in bankruptcy; jur.)
مأمورية ma’mūrīya pl. -āt order, instruction; errand; task, assignment, mission; commission; commissioner's office, administrative branch of a government agency, e.g., قضائية مأمورية (qaḍā’īya) judicial commission charged with jurisdiction in outlying communities (Eg.)
متآمرون muta’āmirūn, conspirators, plotters
مؤتمون mu’tamirūn conspirators, plotters; members of a congress, convention, or conference, conferees
مؤتمر mu’tamar pl. -āt conference; convention, congress│الصلح مؤتمر m. aṣ- ṣulḥ peace conference
 امرك II ta’amraka to become Americanized, adopt the American way of life, imitate the Americans
تأمرك ta’amruk Americanization
امرلس amarillis amaryllis (bot.)
America│ )امريقا also (formerly, amrīkā امريكا 27 America South (janūbīya) امريكا الجنوبية
امريكي amrīkī American; (pl. -ūn) an American
االمريكان al-amrīkān the Americans
امريكاني  amrīkānī American; (pl. -ūn) an American
امس amsu (but acc. امسا amsan) the day past, yesterday; the immediate past, recent time; -- amsi (adv.) yesterday; recently, lately, not long ago│ باالمس bi-l-amsi yesterday; not long ago; االول امس a. l- awwal two days ago, the day before yesterday
amāsīy اماسى -āt, pl. umsīya امسية
evening
امستردام amstirdām Amsterdam
امشير amšīr the sixth month of the Coptic calendar
امع imma‘ and امعة imma‘a characterless person; opportunist, timeserver
امل amala u (amal) to hope (ھ or ب for), entertain hopes (ھ or ب of) II to hope; to expect (ھ من s.th. of s.o.); to raise hope. (ه in s.o.), hold out hope. (ه for s.o.), give (ه s.o.) reason to hope or expect│ خيرا امله (ḳairan) to let s.o. hope for the best V to look attentively (في ھ، at), regard, contemplate (في ھ، s.th.); to meditate; to consider, think over, ponder (في ھ، s.th.), reflect (في ھ، on)
امل amal pl. آمال āmāl hope, expectation (في of s.th., also كاذب امل │(ب fallacious hope
مأمل ma’mal pl. مآمل ma’amil  hope
تأمل ta’ammul pl. -āt consideration; contemplation; pl. تأمالت meditations
آمل āmil hopeful
مؤمل mu’ammil hopeful
مأمول ma’mūl hoped for, expected
متأمل muta’ammil contemplative, meditative, reflective; pensive, wistful, musing
امن amuna u (امانة amāna) to be faithful, reliable, trustworthy; -- amina a (amn, امان amān) to be safe, feel safe (من or ھ from) II to reassure (ه s.o.), set s.o.’s (ه) mind at rest; to assure, ensure, safeguard, guarantee, warrant, bear out, confirm, corroborate (ھ على، s.th.); to insure (ضد الحريق against fire); to entrust (ه to s.o., على s.th.); to say "amen" (على to s.th.) IV to believe (ب in) VIII to trust (ه s.o.), have confidence, have faith (ه in); to entrust (
ه على s.o. with, to s.o s.th.) X = VIII; to ask for protection, for a promise of security, for indemnity (ه s.o.)
امن amn safety; peace, security, protection│العام االمن (‘āmm) public safety; االمن رجال the police
امان amān security, safety; peace; shelter, protection; clemency, quarter (mil.); safeguarding, assurance of protection; indemnity, immunity from punishment│ﷲ امان في (a valedictory phrase) in God's protection!
امين amīn pl. امناء umanā’  reliable, trustworthy, loyal, faithful, upright, honest; safe, secure; authorized representative or agent; trustee; guarantor (على of); chief, head; superintendent, curator, custodian, guardian, keeper; chamberlain; master of a guild (Tun.); (mil.) approx.: quartermaster-sergeant (Eg. 1939)│ االول االمين (awwal) Lord Chamberlain (formerly, at the Eg. Court); االمناء كبير approx.: Chief Master of Ceremonies (ibid.); المخزن امين a. al- maḳzan warehouse superintendent; stock clerk; الدولة سر امين  a. sirr ad-daula and السر امين a. as-sirr permanent secretary of state (Sy,.); الصندوق امين a. aṣ-ṣundūq and المال امين treasurer; cashier; العاصمة امين mayor (esp. Ir.); عام امين (‘āmm) secretary general; المكتب امين a. al-maktab (formerly) a subaltern rank in the Eg. navy (1939) 28
آمين āmīn amen!
امانة amāna reliability, trustworthiness; loyalty, faithfulness, fidelity, fealty; integrity, honesty; confidence, trust, good faith; deposition in trust; trusteeship; (pl.
 -āt) s.th. deposited in trust, a deposit, trust, charge; secretariat│الصندوق امانة a. aṣ- ṣundūq treasury department; عامة امانة (‘āmma) secretariat general; االمانات محزن maḳzan al-a. baggage checkroom
مأمن ma’man place of safety, safe place
تأمين ta’mīn securing, protection; assurance; safeguarding; reassurance; ensuring; guaranty, warranty; security, surety; insurance│ اجتماعي تأمين (ijtimā’ī) social security; الحريق ضد تأمين (ḍidda) fire insurance; الحياة على تأمين (ḥayāh) life insurance
ايمان iman faith, belief (ب in)
ائتمان I’timān trust, confidence; credit
استئمان isti’mān trust, confidence
آمن āmin peaceful
مأمون ma’mūn reliable, trustworthy
عليه مؤمن mu’amman ‘alaihi insured
مؤمن mu’min believing, faithful; believer
مؤتمن mu’taman entrusted (على with); confidant; sequestrator (jur.)
امنيبوس omnibus omnibus, bus
 اموى amawī of or like a bondmaid or handmaid
 اموي umawī Ommiad (adj.)
امية بنو banū umayya the Ommiads
اميبا amībā amoebae
اميرال amīrāl admiral
America amērika amērikā, اميركا، اميركه
اميرالية amīrālīya admiralty
 ان an (conj.) that; -- in 1. (conj.) if; وان wa-in although, even though, even if; ان – وان be it -- or (be it); اال illā (= ال ان) look up alphabetically 2. (particle) not, esp. in the phrase اال ھو ان in huwa illā (f. اال ھي ان) it is nothing but, it is no more than
 ان anna (conj.) that; انه بما bi-mā annahū since he (it), because he (it); انه على ‘alā annahū while he (it), whereas he (it); introducing a main clause: however, yet; انه وذلك that is to say, namely, to wit; -- innā (intensifying particle introducing a nominal clause) verily, truly (in most cases not translated in English)
انما innamā but, but then; yet, however; rather, on the contrary
 ان anna i (انين anīn, تأنان ta’nān) to groan, moan (من at)
انات وآھات groan│ moan, -āt pl. anna انة
wails and laments
انين anīn plaintive sound, wail; groan, moan(ing)
انا ana I
اناني anānī egotistic; egoistic(al), selfish
انانية anānīya egoism, selfishness
االناضل al-anāḍul Anatolia
اناناس anānas pineapple
انب II to blame, censure, reprehend, upbraid (ه s.o.)
تأنيب ta’nīb blame, censure, rebuke
انبا (pronounced ambā) Abba, a high ecclesiastic title of the Coptic Church, preceding the names of metropolitans, bishops, patriarchs, and saints (< Άββα)
anābīr  انابير anābir , انابر pl. anbār انبار
warehouse, storehouse, storeroom 29
انباشي (Turk. onbaşı) onbašī a mil. rank: corporal (formerly, Eg.); انباشي وكيل approx.: private first class (Eg.)
نب see انبوب، انبوبة alembic inbīq انبيق
انت an-ta, f. anti thou, you (2nd pers. sing.); pl.
m. انتم antum, f. انتن antunna you (2nd pers. pl. and polite form of address); dual انتما antumā both of you
انتذا anta-dā it’s you!
museum antīkḳāna انتيكخانة
انتيكة antīka pl. -āt (eg.) old, old-fashioned, outmoded
انتمون antimūn antimony
انث anuta u (انوثة unūta) to be or become feminine, womanly, womanish, effeminate II to make feminine; to effeminate, make effeminate; to put into the feminine form (gram.) V to become feminine (also gram.)
 انثى untā pl. اناث ināt, اناثى anātā feminine; female; a female (of animals); االنثيان al-untayān the testicles
انثوى untawī womanly, female, women's (in compounds); effeminate, womanish
انوثة unūta femininity, womanliness
تأنيث ta’nīt the feminine, feminine form
(gram.)
مؤنث mu’annat (gram.) feminine (adj.)
انثروبولوجيا antrōbōlōjiyā anthropology
انجاص injās (syr.) pear
انجلترا (It. Inghilterra) ingilterā England
االنجليز al-ingəlīz the English
انجليزى ingəlīzī English; Englishman
gospel anajīl  اناجيل pl. injil انجيل
انجيلى injīlī evangelical; evangelist
انجيلية injīlīya evangelical creed
االندلس  al-andalus Spain
اندونيسيا indūnīsiyā Indonesia
انس anisa a and anusa u (uns) to be companionable, sociable, nice, friendly, genial; به انس to like s.o.’s company, like to be together with s.o.; to be or get on intimate terms (ب or الى with s.o.); to be used, accustomed, habituated (الى to); to perceive, notice, find (ھ a quality, من في، in s.o.); to sense, feel, make out, recognize (ھ s.th., في in, at)│ لحديثه انس(li-ḥadītihī) to like to listen to s.o. II to put at ease; to tame III to be friendly, nice (ه to s.o.); to entertain, amuse (ه s.o.) IV to keep s.o. (ه) company; to entertain, delight, amuse (ه s.o.); to perceive, discern, make out (with the eyes; ھ s.th.); to sense (ھ s.th.); to find, see, notice, observe, e.g., الكفاية فيه آنس he saw that be was duly qualified, that he was a capable man V to become incarnate (Son of God) X to be sociable, companionable; to get on familiar terms, become intimate; to become tame; to be friendly, nice, kind (ه to s.o.); to accommodate o.s., accustom o.s., settle down; to be familiar, familiarize o.s., acquaint o.s. (ب or الى with); to inform o.s., gather information (ب ahout); to take into consideration, take into account, bring into play (ب s.th.), draw upon s.th. (
ب); to listen (ل to s.th.), heed (ب an opinion)
انس uns sociability; intimacy, familiarity, friendly atmosphere
انسى unsī: انسى كعب (ka‘b) talus, inner anklebone (anat.)
انس ins (coll.) man, mankind, human race
انسي insī human; human being
ناس nās (coll.) and اناس unās people ناسوت nāsūt mankind, humanity 30 اناسى anāsīy (pl.) people, human beings,
humans
انيس anīs close, intimate; close friend; friendly, kind, affable, civil, polite, courteous
انسان insan man, human being│ انسان العين i. al-‘ain pupil (of the eye)
انسانة insāna woman
انسانى insānī human; humane; humanitarian, philanthropist
انسانية insānīya humanity, humaneness; politeness, civility; mankind, the human race
مؤانسة mu’ānasa intimacy, familiarity, friendliness, geniality, cordiality; sociability; conviviality
ايناس īnās exhilaration; friendliness, geniality; familiarity, intimacy, cordiality; sociability
تأنس ta’annus incarnation (Chr.)  ائتناس I’tinās social life, sociability آنسة ānisa pl. -āt, اوانس awānis  young
lady, miss
مأنوس ma’nūs familiar, accustomed
مستأنس musta’nis tame
انش (Engl.) inš inch
انشوجة (It. acciuga) anšūga (eg.) anchovy
انطاكية anṯākiya  Antioch (ancient city in Syria; now Antakya, in S Turkey)
انطولوجى onṯōlōjī ontologic(al) (philos.)
انف anifa a (anaf) to disdain, scorn (من s.th., ان
to do s.th.); to reject haughtily (ھ s.th.) X
 to resume, renew, recommence (ھ s.th.); (jur.) to appeal (ھ a sentence)
انف anf pl. آناف ānāf, انوف unūf nose; spur (of a mountain); pride│ انفه رغم ragma anfihi in defiance of him, to spite him; انفه كسر (anfahū) to humiliate s.o., to put s.o.'s nose out of joint; االنف شامح stuck-up, haughty, proud
انفى anfī nasal
انفة anafa pride; rejection; disdain (من of s.th.)
انوف anūf proud, haughty, stuck-up, supercilious, disdainful
استئناف isti’nāf fresh start, recommencement, renewal, resumption, reopening (also, of a legal case); appeal (jur.)│ استئنافا قدم (qaddama) to appeal, make an appeal (jur.)
استئنافى isti’nāfī of appeal, appellate;
استئنافيا isti’nāfīyan by appeal
آنف ānif preceding, above│ الذكر آنف (dikr) preceding, above, above-mentioned; آنفا ānifan previously, above, in the foregoing
مؤتنف mu’tanaf primordial, virginal state; beginning
انفرس (Fr. Anvers) anvers Antwerp (city in N Belgium)
انفلونزا influwanzā influenza, grippe
انق aniqa a to be neat, trim, smart, spruce, comely, pretty; to be happy (ب about), be delighted (ب by) IV to please (ه s.o.)│يؤنقه الشيء (šai’u) he likes the thing V to apply
o.s. eagerly and meticulously (فى to); to be meticulous, fastidious, finical; to be chic, elegant
اناقة anāqa elegance
انيق anīq neat, trim, spruce, comely, pretty; elegant, chic
انوق anūq Egyptian vulture (Neophron perenopterus)│ االنوق بيض من اعز a‘azz  min baiḍi l-a. (lit.: rarer than the eggs of a vulture, i.e.) approx.: scarcer than hens’ teeth (proverbially for s.th. rare)
تأنق ta’annuq elegance 31
مؤنق mu’anniq, مونق mūniq pretty, comely, winsome, nice, pleasing
متأنق muta’anniq chic, elegant
انقره anqara Ankara
eel anqalīs انقليس
آنك ānuk lead (metal)
انكشارى inkišārī pl. -īya Janizary
انكلترة انكلترا، (It. Inghilterra) ingilterā, ingiltera England
انكلوسكسون al-anglosaksūn the Anglo-Saxons
Anglo- al-anglosaksūnīya انكلوسكسونية
Saxondom
االنكليز al-inglīz the Engliah
انكليزى inglīzī English; Englishman
eel ankalīs انكليس
االنام al-anām and اآلنام (coll.) mankind, the human race
انموذج unmūdaj model, pattern; type, example; sample, specimen
انمون anamūn anemone (bot.)
 انى anā i to mature, become ripe; to draw near, approach, come (esp. time)│ ان له انى it is (high) time that he; esp. in negative statements: يأن الم a-lam ya'ni? isn't it about time ...? V to act slowly, proceed unhurriedly, bide one's time, be patient X to take one's time, hesitate (فى in, with); to wait
انى anan pl. آناء ānā’ (span of) time, period│ الليل آناء فى(laili) all night long; آناء النھار واطراف الليل ānā’a l-laili wa-aṯrāfa n- nahār by day and by night
اناة anāh deliberateness; perseverance, patience│ االناة طول ṯūl al-a. long- suffering, great patience; االناة طويل long- suffering (adj.)
اناء inā’ pl. آنية āniya, اوانawānin  vessel, container, receptacle│ الطعام آنية a.. aṯ- ṯa‘ām table utensils, dishes; mess kit
تأن ta’annin slowness, deliberateness
متأن muta’annin slow, unhurried, deliberate
  انى annā (interrog. part.) where ... from? why is it that ... ? why? Where? (place and
 direction); how? wherever; however│ وانى اال له ... (allā) and why shouldn't he ... ?
aniseed آنيسون anīsūn, انيسون
انيميا anīmiyā anemia│○ خبيثة انيميا pernicious anemia (med.)
آه āhi! آھا āhan! (interj.) oh!
اھب II to prepare, make ready, equip (ه ھ، ل s.o., s.th. for) V to be ready, be prepared; to prepare o.s., get ready; to equip s.o., be equipped (ل for)
اھبة uhba pl. اھب uhab preparation, preparedness, readiness, alertness; equipment, outfit, gear│ الحرب اھبة u. al- ḥarb military equipment; الرحيل اھبة على ready to set out; االستعداد اھبة على fully prepared; on the alert (mil.); اھبته أخذ to make one's preparations, get ready
اھاب ihāb skin, hide
تأھب ta’ahhub preparedness, readiness; (pl. -āt) preparation
متأھب muta’ahhib ready, prepared
اھل ahala u (اھول uhūl) to take a wife, get married; -- ahila a to be on familiar terms (ب with); -- pas. uhila to be inhabited, be populated (region, place) II to make fit or suited, to fit, qualify (ه ھ، ل s.o., s.th. for); to make possible (ل ھ for s.o. s.th.), enable (ل ھ s.o. to do s.th.), make accessible (ل ھ to s.o. s.th.); to welcome ( ب s.o.) V to be or become fit, suited, qualified (ل for s.th.); to 32 take a wife; to marry, get married X to deserve merit (ھ s.th.), be worthy (ھ of)
اھل ahl pl. –ūn, اھال ahālin relatives, folks, family; kin, kinfolk; wife; (with foll. genit.) people, members, followers, adherents, possessors, etc.; inhabitants; deserving, worthy (ل of s.th.); fit, suited, qualified (ل for); pl. األھالى األھلون، the natives, the native population│ البيت اھل a. al-bait members (of the house, i.e.) of the family; the Prophet's family; الدار اھل the people living in the house; الحرفة اھل a. al- ḥirfa people of the trade; الحلف اھل a. al- ḥilf people pledged by oath, members of a sworn confederacy; الخبرة اھل a. al-ḳibra people of experience, experts; السفسطة اھل
a. al-safsata Sophists; السنة اھل a. as-sunna
the adherents of the Sunna, the Sunnis; اھل والوبر المدر a. al-madar wa-l-wabar the resident population and the nomads; اھل الوجاھة a. al-wajāha people of rank and high social standing; وسھال اھال ahlan wa- sahlan welcome! بك اھال ahlan bika welcome to youl اھل دارنا في له he is a welcome guest in our house
اھلي ahlī domestic, family (adj.); native, resident; indigenous; home, national│ اھلي بنك national bank (Eg.); اھلية حرب  (ḥarb) civil war; اھلية محكمة (maḥkama) indigenous court (Eg.); القضاء األھلي (qaḍā’) jurisdiction of indigenous courts; األھلي اإلنتاج (intāj) domestic production; اھلي وقف (waqf) family wakf
اھلية ahlīya aptitude, fitness, suitableness, competence; qualification │ ا القانونية ألھلية the civil rights; األھلية كامل legally competent; األھلية عديم legally incompetent, under tutelage
آھل ahil and مأھول ma’hūl inhabited, populated (region, place)
مؤھالت mu’ahhilāt qualifications, abilities, aptitudes
متأھل muta’ahhil married
مستأھل musta’hil worthy, deserving, meriting; entitled
اھليلج ihlīlaj myrobalan, emblic (fruit of Phyllanthus emblica L.; bot.); ellipse (geom.)
اھليلجي ihlīlajī elliptic(al)
او au or; (with foll. subj.) unless except that
 (آب (اوب āba u (aub, اوبة auba, اياب iyab) to return; آب ب to catch, contract, suffer, incur s.th., be in for s.th., be left with, get one’s share of
اوب كل من min kulli aubin from all sides or directions; وصوب اوب كل من (ṣaubin) do.
اوبة auba return
اياب iyāb return │ وايابا ذھابا dahāban wa-iyaban there and back; back and forth, up and down
مآب ma’āb place to which one returns; (used as verbal noun:) return │ ومآب ذھوب coming and going
 آب look up alphabetically
 اوبرا and اوبرا (It. opera) ōpərā opera; opera house
اوبريت (Fr.) ōpərēt operetta
اوت (Fr. août) August (month; mağr.) اوتوبيس (Fr. autobus) otobīs autobus, bus اوتجراف (Fr.) otogrāf pl. -āt autograph اوتوقراطي oṯūqrāṯī autocratic
اوتوماتيكي (Fr.) otomātīkī automatic اوتوموبيل (Fr.) otombīl automobile اوتيل (Fr.) ōtēl pl. -āt hotel
اوج auj highest point, acme, pinnacle; culmination, climax; apogee (astron.); peak (fig.; of power. of fame) 33
آح āḥ albumen, eggwhite O آحين āḥīn albumin
(آد (اود āda u (aud) to bend, flex, curve, crook ( ھ s.th.); to burden, oppress, weigh down ( ھ s.o.); -- اود awida a (awad) to bend; to be bent V to bend; to bow
اودة auda burden, load
اود awad:  باوده قام to provide for s.o.’s needs, stand by s.o. in time of need; اوده أقام (awadahū) do.; to support s.o., furnish s.o. with the means of subsistence
اوار uwār heat, blaze; thirst
اوربا urubbā Europe
اوربي urubbī Europesn
اورشليم ūrušalīm  Jerusalem
ارطة =) اورطة) urṯa pl. ارط uraṯ battalion (formerly, Eg.; mil.)
اورغوي uruguwāy Uruguay
اوركسترا (It.) arkestrā orchestra
اورنيك (Turk. örnek) urnīk pl. ارانيك arānīk  sample, specimen; model, pattern; form, blank
Europe اوروپا urubbā, اوروبا
اوروبي urubbī Europesn
Uruguay uruguwāy اوروجواي
اوز II (eg.) to ridicule (على s.o.), make fun of
s.o. (على)
اوز iwazz (col1.; n. un.) goose, geese
آس ās myrtle; see also alphabetically
Australia usturāliyā اوستراليا Austria austriyā (It.) اوستريا Oslo اوسلو
اسطى see ūsṯā اوسطى
اوشية ūšīya pl. اواش awāšin prayer, oration (Copt.-Chr.)
آفة āfa pl. -āt harm, hurt, damage, ruin, bane, evil; epidemic, plague; plant epidemic
مؤوف ma’ūf stricken by an epidemic
اوفرول (Engl.) ovirōl overalls
 (آق (اوق āqa u to bring s.o. (على) bad luck, cause discomfort or hardship (على to) II to burden (ه s.o.) with s.th. unpleasant, troublesome or difficult
اقة see اوقة 
 اويقات uwaiqāt (dimin. of اوقات) short times; good times
ocean oqiyānūs oqiyānus,    اويقيانس، اويقيانوس
اوقية ūqīya pl. -āt ounce, a weight of varying magnitude (Eg.: 37.44 g; Aleppo 320 g; Jerusalem 240 g; Beirut 213.3 g)
اوكازيون (Fr. occasion) okazyōn clearing sale, special sale
Ukraine ukrānīya اوكرانيا
اوكسجين (Fr. oxygène) oksižēn oxygen
(آل (اول āla u (aul, مآل ma’āl) to return, revert ( الى to); to go back, be attributed, be attributable (الى to), spring, derive (الى from); to lead, conduce, tend (الى to), result eventually (الى in); to come or go eventually (الى to s.o.), pass into the hands of (الى األمر آل │ (الى the long and the short of it was that ... ; الى المطاف به آل (maṯāfu) he eventually got to the point where ... II to interpret, explain (ھ s.th.)
آل āl family, relatives, kinsfolk, clan; companions, partisans, people; mirage, fatamorgana
آلة āla pl. -āt instrument, utensil; tool; apparatus; device, implement, appliance; machine│ الحس آالت ā. al-ḥiss  sensory organs; بخارية آلة (buḳārīya) steam engine; الجر آلة ā. al-jarr tractor; جھنمية آلة (jahannamīya) infernal machine; حربية آلة
 آلة التحريك ٤٣ war; of instrument (ḥarbīya) calculating آلة حاسبة engine; motor, power al-ḥiyāka a. آلة الحياكة machine; آلة راديو machine; sewing آلة الخياطة loom; crane, machine, hoisting آلة رافعة radio; آلة مسخنة and آلة التسخين pump; derrick; آلة التصوير heater; (musaḳḳina) printing آلة الطباعة camera; (photographic) machine; washing al-gasl a. آلة الغسل press; receiver, آلة االستقبال incubator; آلة التفريخ (muqaṯṯira) آلة مقطرة (radio); set receiving آلة and آلة الكتابة still; apparatus, distilling al- la‘b a. آلة لعب القمار typewriter; كاتبة (mūsīqīya) آلة موسيقية machine; slot qimār siren alarm; آلة التنبيه instrument; musical آلة صماء automobile); an (of horn puppet creature, tool, (fig.) (ṣammā’)
آلى ālī mechanic(al); mechanized; motorized; instrumental; organic│ محراث آلي (miḥrat) motor plow; اآللية القوات (quwāt) motorized troops; آلية حركة (ḥaraka) a mechanical movement
آلية ālīya mechanics
آالتى ālātī pl. آالتية ālātīya (eg.) musician; singer
اول awwal , f. اولى ūlā, pl. m. -ūn, اوائل awā’il  first; foremost, most important, principal, chief, main; first part, beginning; (with def. article also) earlier, previous, former; see a1so under │ولى االول االنسان (insān) primitive man; اول طبيب physician-in-chief; االولون ,االوائل the forebears, forefathers, ancestors; الشھر اوائل
a.	aš-šahr the first ten days of a month, beginning of a month; مرة الول li-awwali marratin or االولى للمرة for the first time; من اوائله من اوله، since its beginnings, from the very beginning; آخره الى اوله من (āḳirihī) from beginning to end, from A to Z; اول االمر awwala l-amr at first, in the beginning; فاالول االول each time the first available; ما اول (awwala) the moment when, just when; at the very outset of; اكثر االول من (aḳtara) more than before
اوال awwalan first, firstly, in the first place; at first, in the beginning│ باول اوال and فأوال اوال by and by, gradually, one after the other, one by one; واخيرا اوال and اوال وآخرا (āḳiran) first and I~st, altogether; simply and solely, merely
اولى awwalī prime, primary, primordial, original, initial, first; elemental, fundamental, basic, principal, chief, main; elementary; primitive, pristine, primeval│ اولية مدرسة (madrasa) elementary school, grade school; اولية مواد (mawādd) raw materials; اولى عدد (‘adad) prime number; اولية فاتورة (fātūra) pro forma invoice
اولية awwalīya pl. -āt fundamental truth, axiom; primary constituent, essential component, element; precedence; priority
ايل ayyil, iyyal, uyyal pl. ايائل ayā’il  stag
ايالة iyāla pl. -āt province; regency
ايلولة ailūla title deed (jur.)
مآل ma’āl end; outcome, final issue, upshot; result, consequence│ وفي الحال في المآل at present and in the future
تأويل ta’wīl pl. -āt interpretation, explanation
اوالء ulā’i, اوالئك اولئك، ulā’ika these; those, pl. of the demonstr. pron. ذا and ذلك
theااللعاب االولمبية Olympic│ olimbī اولمبى games Olympic
اولمبياد olimbiyād Olympiad
اولو ulū (pl. of ذو) owners, possessors, people (with foll.genit.: of)│ االمر اولوu. l-amr rulers, powerful leaders; والعقد الحل اولو u. l- ḥall wa-l-'aqd (lit.: masters of solving and binding) do.; الشأن اولو u. š-ša’n the responsible people
 اوام uwām thirst
 اوم ohm (el.) 35
اومنيبوس omnībūs omnibus, bus
 آن ān time; اآلن al-āna now│ آن فى and آن فى واحد at the same time, simultaneously; من آخر الى آن (āḳara) from time to time; بين ما وآخر آن (wa-āḳara) and آن بعد آنا sometimes, at times, now and then: once in a while; آنا فآنا gradually, by and by, little by little; آنا وآونة -- (āwinatan) sometimes -- sometimes, at times -- at times; اآلن قبل qabla l-āna before, previously, formerly; لآلن li-l-āna and اآلن حتى ḥattā l-āna until now, hitherto, so far; اآلن بعد ba‘da l-āna from now on, henceforth, in the future; من فصاعدا اآلن min al-āna fa-ṣā‘idan do.
آنئذ āna’idin that day, at that time, then
 آنذاك ānadāka that day, at that time, then
اون aun calmness, serenity, gentleness
قبل اوانه time│ āwina آونة pl. awān اوان time, right the at في اوانه prematurely; the at في غير اوانه seasonably, timely, بين unseasonably; untimely, time, wrong بين اآلونة واالخرى time; to time from اآلونة at uḳrā) (āwinatan, آونة وأخرى and (uḳrā) sometimes آونة – وأخرى sometimes; times,
– sometimes, at times – at times; االوان فات (fāta) it is too late; االوان آن (āna) the time has come, it is time (ل for, to do s.th.)
  ايوانlook up alphabetically
انباشى see corporal, onbašī اونباشى
(آه (اوه āha u and II to moan, sigh V to moan, sigh; to sigh with admiration (ل over), exclaim “ah!”
اوه awwah (interj.) oh!
آه āhi, آھāhan, اواه awwāhi oh!
آھة āha pl. -āt sigh, moan; pl. آھات sighs of admiration; rapturous exclamations
تأوه ta’awwuh moaning. sighing; admiring exclamation; plaintive sound, wail
اوى awā i to seek refuge, seek shelter (الى at a place); to go (الى to bed); to betake o.s., repair (الى to a place); to shelter, house, put up, lodge, accommodate, receive as a guest (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) II to shelter, lodge, put up, accommodate, receive as a guest (ه s.o.) IV to seek shelter (الى at a place), to retire (الى to a place); to betake o.s., repair (الى to a place); to shelter, house, put up, lodge, accommodate (ه s.o.)
ايواء īwā’ accommodation, lodging, housing, sheltering
مأوى ma’wan pl. مآو ma’āwin place of refuge, retreat, shelter; abode; resting place; dwelling, habitation│ ليلى مأوى (lailī) shelter for the night; doss house
a. banāt بنات آوى pl. āwā ibn ابن آوى
jackal
 آية āya, coll. آي āy, pl. -āt sign, token, mark; miracle; wonder, marvel, prodigy; model, exemplar, paragon, masterpiece (فى of, e.g., of organization, etc.); Koranic verse, الحكيم الذكر آي (āy ad-dikr) the verses of the
Koran; passage (in a book), utterance, saying, word; آيات (with foll. genit.) moat solemn assurances (of love, of gratitude)
 اى ay that is (to say), i.e.; namely, to wit
 اى ī yes (with foll. وﷲ yes indeed! Yes, by God!)
 اى ayy, f. اية ayya (with foll. genit. or suffix) which? what? what kind of? Whoever, whosoever; any, every, no matter what ... ; (with neg.) no; ايما ayyumā whatever, whatsoever│كان ايا كانت، اية ayyan kāna, ayyatan kānat whoever he (or she) is, no matter who he (or she) is; كان من اي ayyu man kāna whoever it may be, whosoever; حال اي على (ayyi ḥālin) in any case, at any 36 rate, at all events, by all means; واحد اى ayyu wāḥidin any one; شأن اى شأنا له ان inna lahū ša’nan ayya ša’nin it is of the greatest importance (lit.: it is of importance, and of what importance!); اعجاب ايما به اعجب u‘jiba bihi ayyama i‘jābin how much he admired him! he admired him greatly; اقبال ايما عليه اقبل aqbala ‘alaihi ayyama iqbālin he showed the greatest interest in it
ايا iyyā with nominal suffix to express the accusative│ان اياك take care not to ..., be careful not to ...; و اياك من، اياك beware of ...
! واياك (dial. wayyāk), واياه (wayyāh) with you, with him
اير  see ايار
ايد II to back, support (ه, s.o., ھ a claim, an aspiration, etc.); to confirm, corroborate, endorse (ھ news, a. judgment, etc.) V = pass. of II
تأييد ta’yīd corroboration, confirmation, endorsement, backing, support
ايدروجين (Fr. Hydrogène) idrožēn hydrogen
bomb hydrogen (qunbula) قنبلة ايدروجينية
 اير air pl. ايور uyūr penis
 ايار ayyār  May (Syr., Leb., Ir., Jord.)
ايران īrān Iran, Persia
ايرانى īrānī Iranian, Persian; (pl. -ūn) a Persian, an Iranian
ايرلندا irlandā Ireland
ايرلندى irlandī Irish; (pl. -ūn) Irishman
 ايريال (Engl.) ēriyāl aerial, antenna
Isis īzīs ايزيس
ايس ayisa a (اياس iyās) to despair (من of s.th.)
اياس iyās despair
ايشرب (Fr. écharp,) sash
(آض (ايض āḍa i to return, revert (الى to s.th.); to become (الى s.th.)
ايضا aiḍan also, too, as well, likewise, equally; again; in addition, besides, moreover
Italy īṯālīyā ايطاليا
ايطالى īṯālī Italian; (pl. -ūn) an Italian
ايقونة (Gr.  είκών) īqūna and ايقونية īqūnīya pl.
-āt icon (Chr.)
ايك aik (coll.; n. un. ة) thicket, jungle
اول see ايالة and ايل  
  ايلول ailūl  September (Syr., Leb., Ir., Jord.)
  ايلولة ailūla title deed (jur.)
(آم (ايم āma i: زوجته من آم (zaujatihī) to lose one's wife, become or be a widower, آمت زوجھا من (zaujiha) to lose one’s husband, become or be a widow
ta’ayyum تأيم and uyūm ايوم aima, ايمة
widowhood
ayāmā ايامى ayā’im , ايائم pl. ayyim ايم
widower, widow
يوم see aiwam  ايوم ayy اي  see ayyumā ايما
 (آن (اين āna i to come, approach, draw near (time)│ االوان آن (awān) the time has come: ان له آن it’s time for him to ...
اون see آن
اين aina where? (= at or to what place?)│ من اين min aina where … from? اين الى where? (= to what place?) من نحن اين how far we still are from … worlds separate us
from ... (fig.); ذاك من ھذا اين what is this compared with that! 37
االين al-ainu the where; space (philos.)
اينما ainamā wherever
ايان ayyāna when? (conj.) when
  اينII to ionize (ھ s.th.) V to be ionized (el.)
ايون iyōn pl. -āt ion
تأيين ta’yīn ionization
متأين muta’ayyin ionized
ايه īhi, īha, īhin (interj.) well! now then! All right!
ايھا ayyuhā, with fem. also ايتھا ayyatuhā
(vocative particle) O ... !
ايوب ayyūb  Job
االيوبيون al-ayyūbīyūn the Ayubites
يوم see aiwam  ايوم
اين  seeايون  
  ايوان īwān pl. -āt recess-like sitting room with a raised floor, usually opening on the main room or courtyard through an arcade; estrade

ب
 ب abbreviation of باب chapter
 ب bi (prep.) in, at, on (place and time); with (indicating connection, association, attendance); with, through, by means of (designating instrumentality or agency, also with pass. = by); for (= at the price of); by (= to the amount of); by (introducing an oath)│بالليل bi-l-lail at (by) night, بالنھار bi-n-nahār during the daytime, by day; بشرق شماال šamālan bi- šarqin northeast; ونعمت فبھا fa-bihā wa- ni’mat in that case it’s all right; ان بي ليس it is not my intention to ... ; بذاك ھذا hādā bi- dāka now we are even, we are quits; قبل بساعة مجيئه (majī’ihī) an hour before his arrival; ب “with” frequently gives causative meaning to a verb, e.g., نھض بشيء (lit.: to rise with s.tا., i.e.) to boost, further, promote s.th.; الى به بلغ to cause
s.o. to arrive at, lead s.o. to; for its use as copula after negations, etc., see grammar; بال bi-lā without; ان بما bi-mā anna in view of the fact that; since, as, inasmuch as, because; فيه بما bi-mā fīhi including
باء bā’ name of the letter ب
بابا bābā pl. بابوات bābawāt, باباوات pope; papa, father, daddy
papal باباوى bābawī, بابوى
 بابوية bābawīya papacy
  بأبأba’ba’a to say “papa” (child)
 بؤبؤ bu’bu’ root, source, origin; core, heart, inmost part; pupil of the eye, also لعين بؤبؤ
b.	al-‘ain
بابل bābil  Babel, Babylon
بابلى bābilī Babylonian
بابه bābih the second month of the Coptic calendar
بابوج bābūj pl. بوابج bawābij  slipper
بابور bābūr pl. -āt, بوابير bawābīr  (=وابور) locomotive, engine; steamship, steamer
بابونج bābūnaj camomile (bot.)
باتسته bati.ta batiste
باثولوجى batōlōjī pathologic(al)
باثولوجيا batōlōjiyā pathology
باذنجان bādijān and بيذنجان baidinjān (coll.; n. un. ة pl. -āt eggplant, aubergine 38
 بار bār pl. -āt bar; taproom
 بأر ba’ara a to dig a well
بئر bi'r f., pl. آبار ābār, بئار bi’ār well, spring
بؤرة bu’ra pl. بؤر bu’ar center, seat (fig.); site; pit; abyss
باراشوت (Fr. parachute) bārāšūt parachute
باراغواى bārāguwāy Paraguay
بربونى see باربوني
باركيه (Fr.) barkēh parquet, parquetry floor
برنامج see بارنامج
بارة bāra pl. -āt para (coin)
بارود bārūd saltpeter; gunpowder
بارودة bārūda pl. بواريد bawārīd  rifle, carbine
باريس bārīs  Paris
باريسى bārīsī Parisian
بؤوز pl. ba’z بأز and bīzān بيزان pl. bāz باز
bu’ūz, بئزان bi’zān falcon بازار bāzār pl. –āt bazaar بازلت bāzalt basalt
بازوبند bāzūband bracelet
بؤس ba’usa u (بأس ba’s) to be strong, brave, intrepid; -- بئس ba’isa a (بؤس bu’s) to be miserable, wretched VI to feign misery or distress VIII to be sad, worried, grieved
الرجل بئس bi’sa r-rajulu what an evil man!
بأس ba’s strength, fortitude, courage, intrepidity (as verbal noun of بؤس ba’usa); harm, hurt, injury, impairment, detriment, wrong│ البأس شديدcourageous, brave, intrepid; بأس ال (ba’sa) there is no objection to it; unobjectionable; not bad, rather important, considerable, e.g., كميات بھا بأس ال (kammīyāt) considerable quantities; بأس ال (ba'sa) never mind! it doesn't matter! it's all right! ان بأس ال it doesn't matter that ... ; بأس؟ اى ayyu
ba'sin? what does it matter! what of it! ليس من بأس عليه (ba’sun) he will be none the worse for ... ; عليك بأس ال (ba’sa) it won't do you any harm! don't worry! don't be afraid
بئس بنات banātu bi's calamities, adversities, misfortunes
بئس bu’s, بأساء ba’sā’, بؤس bu’ūs and بؤسى bu’sā pl. ابؤس ab’us misery, wretchedness, suffering, distress
بئيس ba’īs pl. بؤساء bu’asā’  miserable, wretched
بائس bā’is miserable, wretched
باستيل (Fr.) bastē1 pastel
باسل bāsīl bacilli
باش bāš senior, chief (in compounds)
باشجاويش bašcāwīš and باشجاويش approx.: master sergeant (formerly, Eg.)
باشحكيم bāšḥakīm physician-in-chief
باشريش bāšrayyis a naval rank, approx.: petty officer 3  class (Eg.)
باشكاتب bāškātib chief clerk
باشمفتى bāšmuftī chief mufti (Tun.) باشمفتش bāamšmufattiš chief inspector باشمھندس bāšmuhandis chief engineer
pasha )باشاوات( bāšawāt باشوات pl. bāšā باشا
باشق bāšaq, bāšiq pl. بواشق bawāšiq  sparrow hawk
الباشقرد al-bāšqird the Bashkirs
بشكير see باشكير
باص (Engl.) bāṣ pl. -āt bus, autobus
باطون bātūn concrete, béton 39 باغة bāgā celluloid; tortoise shell الباكستان al-bākistān Pakistan
باكستانى bākistānī Pakistani (adj. and n.)
  بال bāl whale (zool.)
 بالة bala pl. -āt bundle, bale
balātī بالطي balṯowāt, بالطوات pl. balṯō بالطو
overcoat; paletot بالو (It. ballo ball, dance بالون bālūn) balloon
الباليار جزر juzur al-bāliyār the Balearic Islands
باليه (Fr.) bālēh ballet
باميا and بامية bāmiya gumbo, okra (Hibiscus esculentus L., bot., a popular vegetable in Egypt)
بون see بان
بانورامية شاشة šāša bānōrāmīya (= Fr. écran panoramique) cinemascope screen
بؤونة ba’ūna the tenth month of the Coptic calendar
باى bāy, f. باية bāya pl. -āt formerly, in Tunisia, a title after the names of the members of the Bey's family
الباى دار dār al-bāy (formerly) the Tunisian government
ببر babr pl. ببور bubūr tiger
ببغاوات pl. babbayā’ ) (and babgā  ببغاء
babgāwāt parrot
بت batta u i (batt) to cut off, sever (ھ s.th.); to complete, finish, achieve, accomplish, carry out (ھ s.th.); to fix, settle, determine (ھ s.th.), decide (ھ s.th., فى on s.th.) II to adjudge, adjudicate, award (ھ s.th.) VII to be cut off; to be finished, be done; to be decided│وبينھم بينه االمر انبت قد it's all over between him and them, they are through with each other
بت batt settlement, decision; بتا battan
definitely, once and for all
بتة batta pl. -āt adjudication, award; final decision; البتة al-battata and بتة battatan definitely, positively, decidedly, esp. with negations: absolutely not, definitely not
بتى battī definite, definitive
بتية battiya, bittīya pl. بتاتى batātīy barrel; tub
بتاتا batātan decidedly, definitely, positively, categorically, unquestionably, absolutely
تبتيت tabtīt adjudication, award
بات bātt definite, definitive│بات منع
(man‘) categorical interdiction
 بتر batara u (batr) to cut off, sever (ھ s.th.); to amputate (ھ s.th.); to mutilate, render fragmentarily (ھ a text) VII to be cut off, be severed, be amputated
بتر batr cutting off, severance, separation; amputation
ابتر abtar  curtailed, docked, clipped, trimmed; imperfect, defective, incomplete; without offspring
بتار battār cutting, sharp
باتر bātir cutting, sharp
مبتور mabtūr broken, abrupt, unconnected; fragmentary, incomplete
 بتراء bitrā’ , batrā’  Petra (ancient city of Edomites and Nabataeans; ruins now in SW Jordan)
بترك batrak patriarch
بترول batrūl, bitrōl petroleum
ابتع abta‘  an assonant intensifier of اجمع ajma‘ 
all, altogether, whole, entire
باتع bāti‘ strong; full, whole, entire 40
بتك II to cut off (ھ s.th.)
  بتل batala i u (batl) and II to cut off, sever (ھ s.th.); to make final, close, settle, make conclusive, clinch (ھ s.th.) V to retire from the world and devote one's life to God (ﷲ الى); to be pious, chaste and self- denying; to live in chastity VII to be cut off, be curtailed, be docked
بتول batūl virgin; البتول the Virgin Mary
بتولي batūlī virginal
بتولية batūlīya virginity
متبتل mutabattil an ascetic, a. recluse; a pious, godly man
 بتوال batūlā birch tree
بث batta (batt) to spread, unroll, unfold (ھ s.th., e.g., a rug); to scatter, disperse (ھ s.th.); to disseminate, propagate, spread (ھ
 s.th., e.g., a spirit, an ideology, a doctrine); to sprinkle (ھ ھ s.th. on); to let
s.o. (ه, also ل) in on s.th. (ھ, esp. on a secret); to broadcast, transmit by radio │ العيون بث to peer around; األلغام بث to plant, or lay, mines IV to let (ه s.o.) in on a secret (ھ) VII to be spread; to be scattered
بث batta spreading, dissemina.tion, propagation; grief, sorrow
بثر batara i (batira a) and V to break out with pimples or pustules (skin)
بثر  batr pl. بثور  butūr (n. un. بثرة  batra
pl. batarāt) pimples, pustules
بثر batir, بثير batīr pustulate, pimpled
بثق bataqa i u (with النھر an-nahra) to open flood gates so that the river will overflow its banks VII to break forth, burst out, well out, pour out, gush out; to emanate, proceed, spring (من or عن from)
انبثاق outpouring, effusion, outpour, outburst; emanation
بجح bajiḥa a (bajaḥ) to rejoice (ب at) V to vaunt, flaunt (ب s.th.), boast, brag (ب of)
تبجح tabajjuj bragging, braggery
متبجح mutabajjij braggart
بجدة bajda, bujda root, source. heart, essence, basis│األمر بجدة  the heart of the matter, the actual state of affairs, the true facts; ابن ھو بجدتھا (ibn bujdatihā) he knows the job from the ground up, he is the right man for it
ابجر abiar  obese, corpulent
بجس bajasa u i (bajs) and II to open a passage (for the water), cause (the water) to flow V and VII to flow freely, pour forth copiously, gush out
بجس bajs, بجيس bajīs flowing freely, streaming
بجع baja‘ (n. un. ة) pelican
بجل II to honor, revere, venerate, treat with deference (ه s.o.), show respect (ھ to s.o.); to give precedence (ھ على or ه to s.o. or s.th. over) V to be honored, be revered, be venerated
بجل bajal syphilis (ir.)
تبجيل tabjīl veneration, reverence; deference, respect
مبجل mubajjal revered, respected; venerable
بجم bajama i (bajm, بجوم bujūm) to be speechless, dumfounded
بجن II to clinch (ھ a nail)
بح baḥḥa a (baḥḥ, بحح baḥaḥ, بحوح buḥūḥ, بحاح baḥāḥ, بحوحة buḥūḥa,  بحاحة baḥāḥa) to be or become hoarse, be raucous, husky, harsh (voice) II and IV to make hoarse (ه s.o.)
بحة buḥḥa hoarseness
ابح abaḥḥ  hoarse
مبحوح mabḥūḥ hoarse 41
بحبح II tabaḥbaḥa to be prosperous, live in easy circumstances; to enjoy o.s. have a good time
بحبوح baḥbūḥ gay, merry
بحبوحة buḥbūḥa middle; life of ease and comfort, prosperity, affluence│ بحبوحة في amidst
مبحبح mubaḥbaḥ well-to-do, prosperous; enjoying an easy, comfortable life
بحت baḥt pure, unmixed, sheer; exclusive, also بحتا ;األمر بحت  baḥan merely, solely, purely, exclusively, nothing but ...
بحتر buḥtur stocky, pudgy, thickset
بحتري buḥturī stocky, pudgy, thickset
بحث baḥata a (baḥt) to look, search (ھ or عن for s.th.), seek (ھ or عن s.th.); to do research; to investigate, examine, study, explore (ھ or عن s.th., less frequently with في or على), look into (ھ or عن); to discuss ( ھ a subject, a question) III to discuss (ه with s.o., في a question) VI to have a discussion, discuss together; to confer, have a talk (مع with s.o., في about)
بحث baḥt pl. بحوث buḥūt, ابحاث بحوثات، abḥāt  search (عن for), quest (عن of); examination, study; research; investigation, exploration; discussion; treatise; (pl. ابحاث) study, scientific report ( في on)
بحاث baḥḥāt  scholar, research worker
 بحاثة baḥḥāta eminent scholar
مبحث mabḥāt  pl. مباحث mabāḥit subject, theme, field of investigation or discussion, object of research; research, study, examination; investigation
مباحثة mubāḥata pl. -āt negotiation, parley, conference, talk, discussion
باحث bāḥit pl. -ūn and بحاث buḥḥāt  scholar, research worker; examiner, investigator
بحثر baḥtara to disperse, scatter (ھ s.th.); to waste, squander, dissipate (ھ s.th.) II tabaḥtara pass. of I
بحثر baḥtara waste, dissipation
مبحثر mubaḥtir squanderer, wastrel, spendthrift
 بحر baḥira a to be startled, be bewildered (with fright)
 بحر II to travel by sea, make a voyage IV do.; to embark, go on board; to put to sea, set sail, sail, depart (ship); to go downstream, be sea-bound (ship on the Nile) V to penetrate deeply, delve (في into); to study thoroughly (في a subject) X = V
بحر baḥr pl. بحار biḥār, بحور, buḥūr, ابحار abḥār, ابحر abḥur sea; large river; a noble., or great, man (whose magnanimity or knowledge is comparable to the vastness of the sea); meter (poet.) │ بحر في in the course of, during, سنتين بحر في (sanatain) in the course of two years, within two years; المتوسط األبيض البحر (abyaḍ, mutawassiṯ) the Mediterranean (sometimes shortened to البلطيق بحر ;(األبيض البحر b. al-balṯīq the Baltic Sea; الجنوب بحر b. al-janūb the South Seas; األحمر البحر the Red Sea (also القلزم بحر
the al-ḳazar b. بحر القزر al-qulzum); b. البحر الكسبياتي(؛ بحر الروم (also Sea Caspian
البحر األسود Mediterranean; the ar-rūm b. aẓ- b. بحر الظلمات Sea; Black the (aswad) البحر and lūṯ b. بحر لوط tlantic;ھ the ẓulumāt (eg.) بحر النيل Sea; Dead the (mayyit) الميت Nile the
البحرين al-baḥrain the Bahrein Islands
بحراني baḥrānī of the Bahrein Islands; البحارنة al-baḥārina the inhabitants of the Bahrein Islands
بحري baḥrī sea (adj.), marine; maritime; nautical; naval; navigational; (in Eg.)
northern, baḥrīya (with foll. genit.) north 42 of; (pl. -ūn, ة) sailor, seaman, mariner│ ماھر بحري approx.: seaman apprentice (Eg.); البحرية القوات  (qūwāt) the naval forces; بحرية نباتات (nabātāt) marine flora, water plants
بحرية baḥrīya navy
بحرة baḥra pond, pool
بحار baḥḥār pl. -ūn, بحارة baḥḥāra seaman, mariner, sailor; pl. بحارة crew (of a ship, of an airplane)
بحيرة buḥaira pl. -āt, بحائر baḥā’ir  lake;
(tun.)'vegetable garden, truck garden
بحران buḥrān crisis (of an illness); climax, culmination (also, e.g., of ecstasy)
تبحر tabaḥḥur deep penetration, delving (في into a subject), thorough study (في of)
متبحر mutabaḥḥir thoroughly familiar ( في with); profound, erudite, searching, penetrating
بحلق baḥlaqa: عينيه بحلق (‘ainaihi) to stare, gaze (في at)
 بخ بخ baḳ baḳ excellent! well done! Bravo!
 بخ baḳḳa u (baḳḳ) to snore; to spout, spurt, squirt (ھ s.th.); to sprinkle, splatter (ھ ب s.th. with)
بخاخة baḳḳāḳa nozzle
بخيخة buḳḳēḳa squirt, syringe
مبخة mibaḳḳa nozzle
قليل البخت lottery│ of kind a luck; baḳt بخت
luck bad سوء البخت unIucky;
بخيت baḳīt lucky, fortunate
مبخوت mabḳūt lucky, fortunate
بختر II tabaḳtara to strut, prance
بخر II to vaporize, evaporate (ھ s.th.); to fumigate (ھ s.th.); to disinfect (ھ s.th.); to perfume with incense, expose to aromatic smoke (ھ s.th.) V to evaporate (water); to volatilize, tum into smoke or haze; to perfume 0.8., or be perfumed, with incense
بخار buḳār pl. -āt, ابخرة  abḳira vapor, fume; steam
بخاري buḳārī steam (adj.), steam-driven
 بخور baḳūr incense; frankincense│ بخور مريم b. maryam cyclamen (bot.)
ابخر abḳar  suffering from halitosis
مبخرة mabḳara pl. مباخر mabāḳir  (also
-āt) censer; thurible; fumigator
تبخير  tabḳīr fumigation
تبخر tabaḳḳur evaporation, vaporization
باخرة balfira pl. بواخر  bawāḳir  steamer, steamship
بويخرة  buwaiḳira small steamboat
بخس baḳasa a (baks) to decrease, diminish, reduce (ھ s.th.); to lessen (e.g., قيمته qīmatahū the value of s.th.); to disregard, neglect, fail to heed (ھ s.th.)
بخس baḳs too little, too low; very low (price)
باخس baḳis small, little, trifling, unimportant
بخشيش baḳšīš pl. بخاشيش baḳāšīš   tip, gratuity
بخع baḳa‘a a (baḳ‘) with نفسه : to kill o.s. (with grief, anger, rage)
ابخق abḳaq  f. بخقاء baḳqā’  one-eyed
بخل baḳila a (baḳal), baḳula u (buḳl) to be niggardly, be stingy (ب with s.th., عن or على with regard to s.o.), scrimp (على ,عن s.o., ب for), stint (ب in, عن or على s.o.), withhold (على ,عن from s.o., ب s.th.) VI to give reluctantly, grudgingly (على ,عن to s.o., y s.th.)
بخل buḳl avarice, cupidity, greed 43
بخيل baḳīl pl. بخالء  avaricious, greedy; miser, skinflint
مبخلة mabḳala cause of avarice, that which arouses avarice or greed
بخنق buḳnuq pl. بخانق baḳāniq  kerchief, veil (to cover the head)
< ب badda u (budd) to distribute, spread, disperse II to divide, distribute, spread, scatter, disperse (ھ •.th.); to remove, eliminate (ھ s.th.); to waste, squander, fritter away, dissipate (ھ s.th.) V pass. of II; X to be independent, proceed independently (ب in, e.g., in one's opinion, i.e., to be opinionated, obstinate, head- strong); to possess alone monopolize (ھ
s.th.); to take possession (ھ of s.o.), seize, grip, overwhelm, overcome (ھ s.o.; said of a feeling, of an impulse); to dispose arbitrarily, highhandedly (ب of s.th.); to rule despotically, tyrannically, autocratically (ب over)
بد budd way out, escape│ من بد يكن لم اذا ان (buddun) if it is inevitable that ... ; بد ال (budda) definitely, certainly, inevitably, without fail; by all means; من بد ال it is necessary, inescapable, unavoidable, inevitable, منه له بد ال he simply must do it, he can't get around it; بد كل من min kulli buddin in any case, at any rate
اباديد abādīd   (pl.) scattered
تبديد tabdīd scattering, dispersal, dispersion; removal, elimination; waste, dissipation
استبداد istibdād arbitrariness, high- handedness; despotism; autocracy; absolutism
استبدادي istibdādī arbitrary, highhanded, autocratic, despotic; استبداديات istibdādīyāt arbitrary acts
مبدد mubaddid scatterer, disperser; squanderer, wastrel, spendthrift
مستبد mustabidd arbitrary, highhanded, autocratic, tyrannical, despotic; autocrat, tyrant, despot│برأيه مستبد  (bira’yihī) opinionated, obstinate, headstrong
بدأ bada’a a (بدأ bad’) to begin, start (ب or في with s.th., ھ s.th.; ه with s.o.; with foll. imperf.: to do s.th. or doing s.th. respectively); to set in, begin, start, arise, spring up, crop up II to put (ھ s.th., على before s.th. else), give precedence or priority (ھ to s.th., على over s.th. else) III to begin, start (ب s.th., ه with regard to s.o.), make the first step, take the initiative or lead (ب in s.th., ه toward s.o.) e.g., بادأه بالكالم  (kalām) to accost s.o., speak first to
s.o. IV to do or produce first (ھ s.th.). bring out (ھ s.th. new)│ يعيد وما يبدئ ماmā yubdi’u wa-mā yu‘īd he can't think of a blessed thing to say; ويعيد يبدئ he says or does everything conceivable VIII to begin, start (ب with s.th.)
from منذ البدءstart│ beginning, bad’ بدء (‘audan فعله عودا وبدءا beginning; (very) the
 wa-bad’an) بدئه على عوده (‘audahū ‘alā bad’ihī) or بدء الى عودا (ilā bad’in) he did it all over again, he began anew
bidāya بداية badī’a, بديئة bad’a, بدأة the in في بداية األمرstart│ beginning, first at beginning,
بداءة badā’a beginning, start; first step, first instance│ بدء بداءة badā’ata bad’in right at the outset, at the very beginning
بدائي budā’ī primitive
مبدأ mabda' pl. مبادئ  mabādi’  beginning, start, starting point; basis, foundation; principle; invention; pl. principles, convictions (of a person); ideology; rudiments. fundamental concepts, elements│ المبادئ كتبkutub al-m. elementary books 44
مبدئي mabda’ī original, initial; fundamental, basic; مبدئيا mabda’īyan originally; in principle
ابتدائي ibtidā’ī beginning, start; novitiate (Chr.)│ من ابتداء ibtidā’an min from, beginning ... , as of (with foll. date)
ابتدائي ibtidā’ī initial; preparatory, elementary, primary; of first instance (jur.); original, primitive│ابتدائية محكمة (maḥkama) court of first instance; التعليم االبتدائى elementary education; ابتدائية مدرسة (madrasa) lower grades of a high school, approx.: junior high school (as distinguished from ابتدائية شھادة ؛(ثانوية (šahāda) approx.: junior high school graduation certificate
بادئ bādi’ beginning, starting│ األمر بادئ badi'a l-amr and األمر بادئ في in the beginning, at first; الرأي بادئ في right away, without thinking twice, unhesitatingly;
بدء ذي بادئ badi’a dī bad’in above all, first of all, in the first place, primarily; البادئ ذكره al-badi’u dikruhu (the person or thing) mentioned at the outset, the first- mentioned
مبتدئ mubtadi’ beginning; beginner; novice (Chr.)
مبتدأ mubtada' beginning, start; (gram.)
subject of 8 nominal clause
 بدر badara u to come unexpectedly, by surprise; to escape (من s.o.; e.g., words in excitement) III to come to s.o.’s (ه) mind,
occur to s.o. (t) all of a sudden, strike s.o. (idea, notion); to embark, enter (الى upon s.th.) or set out (الى to do s.th.) without delay; to rush, hurry (الى to s.o., to a place); to hurry up (", with s.th.), الى بادر with foll. verbal noun: to do s.th. promptly, without delay, hasten to do s.th.; to fall upon s.o (ه) with (ب), accost, assail, surprise (ه ب s.o. with s.th.; e.g., غليظ بكالم بادره to snap rudely at s.o.); to react, respond (الى to s.th.)│ انجاز الى بادر الوعد (injāzi l-wa‘d) to set out to fulfill a promise VI الذھن الى تبادر (dihn) to suggest itself strongly, be obvious; to appear at first glance as if (أن ذھني الى تبادر ؛(أن (dihnī) it occurred to me all of a sudden that ... ; الفھم الى تبادر (fahm) to be immediately understood VIII to hurry, rush, hasten (ھ to); to get ahead of s.o. (ه), anticipate, forestall (ه s.o.)│قائال ابتدرھا before she could say a word he
exclaimed ...
بدر badr, pl. بدور budūr full moon
بدرة badra pl. badarāt, بدار bidār huge amount of money (formerly = 10,000 dirhams)│األموال بدرات enormous sums of money
بدار badārī hurry! quick!
مبادرة mubādara undertaking, enterprise
بادرة bādira pl. بوادر bawadir  herald, harbinger, precursor, forerunner, first indication, sign; unforeseen act; stirring, impulse, fit (e.g., of rage); blunder, mistake; بوادر stirrings, impulses│خير بادرة
b. ḳairin a good, or generous, impulse
  بيدر baidar pl. بيادر bayādir   threshing floor
بدروم and بدرون (Turk. bodrum) badrūm, badrūn pl. -āt basement
بدع bada‘a a (bad‘) to introduce, originate, start, do for the first time (ھ s.th.), be the first to do s.th. (ھ); to devise, contrive, invent (ھ s.th.) II to accuse of heresy (ه s.o.) IV = I; to create (ھ s.th.); to achieve unique, excellent results (في in); to be amazing, outstanding (في in s.th.) VIII to invent, contrive, devise, think up (ھ s.th.) X to regard as novel, as unprecedented (ھ s.th.)
 بدع bad‘ innovation, novelty; creation│ وعودا بدعا bad‘an wa-‘audan repeatedly 45
بدع bid‘ pl. ابداع abdā‘ innovator; new, original; unprecedented, novel│بدع ال lā bid‘a no wonder! ان بدع ال lā bid‘a an no wonder that ... ; من بدع s.th. else than; unlike, different from
بدعة bid‘a pl. بدع bida‘ innovation. novelty; heretical doctrine, heresy; pl. creations (of fashion, of art)│ البدع اھل  ahl al-b. heretics
بديع badi', بدع bud‘ unprecedented, marvelous, wonderful, amazing, admirable, singular, unique; creator│ علم البديع  ‘ilm al-b. the art or science of metaphors and (in general) of good style
بديعة badī‘a pl. بدائع badā’i‘  an astonishing, amazing thing, a marvel, a wonder; original creation
بديعي badī‘ī rhetorical
ابدع abda‘  more amazing, more exceptional; of even greater originality
ابداع ibdā‘ creation, fashioning, shaping; a marvelous, unique achievement; uniqueness, singularity, originality; creative ability
O ابداعي ibdā‘ī romantic (lit.)
O ابداعية ibdā‘īya romanticism (lit.)
مبدع mubdi‘ producing, creating; creative; creator; exceptional, unique, outstanding (in an achievement, esp. of an artist)
مبتدع mubtadi‘ innovator; creator; heretic
بيدق look up alphabetically
بدل badala u to replace (ھ ب s.th. by), exchange (ھ ب s.th. for) II to change, alter (ھ ھ s.th. to), convert (ھ ھ s.th. into); to substitute (ھ for s.th., ب or من s.th.), exchange, give in exchange (ھ s.th., ب or من for); to change (ھ s.th.) III to exchange (ه ھ with s.o. s.th.) IV to replace (ھ ب s.th. by), exchange (ھ ب for s.th. s.th. else); to compensate (ه ب ھ s.o. for s.th. with s.th. else), give s.o. (ه) s. th. (ھ) in exchange for (ب) V to change; to be exchanged VI to exchange (ھ s.th., also words, views, greetings) X to exchange, receive in exchange, trade, barter (ھ ب and ب ھ s.th.
for); to replace (ب ھ and ب ھ s.th. by), substitute (ھ ب and ب ھ for s.th. s.th. else)
بدم badal pl. ابدال abdāl substitute, alternate, replacement; equivalent. compensation, setoff; reimbursement, recompense, allowance; price. rate; (gram.) appositional substantive standing for another substantive│الجراية بدل b. al- jirāya allowance for food; السفرية بدل b. as- safarīya travel allowance; االشتراك بدل subscription rate; التمثيل بدل expense account, expense allowance
بدل  badala (prep.) inetead of, in place of, in lieu of
من بدال badalan min in place of, instead of, in lieu of
بدلة badla pl. badalāt, بدل  bidal suit (of clothes); costume│الحمام بدلة  b. al- ḥammām bathing suit; رسمية بدلة (rasmīya) uniform; تشريفاتية بدلة (tašrīfātīya) full- dreas uniform
بدلية badalīya compensation, smart money
بدال badāla (prep.) instead of, ما بدال
(conj.) instead of (being, doing, etc.)
بديل badīl pl. بدالء budalā’   substitute, alternate (عن or من for); stand-in, double (theat.); (f. ة) serving as a replacement or substitute│ بديلة مفرزة (mafraza) reserve detachment (mil.)
بدال baddāl grocer; money-changer
بدالة baddāla culvert; pipeline; telephone exchange, central
بدل see mabādil  مبادل □
تبديل tabdīl change, alteration 46
مبادلة mubādala pl. -āt exchange│ مبادالت تجارية (tijārīya) commercial exchange, trade relations
ابدال ibdāl exchange, interchange, replacement (ب by), substitution (ب of); change; phonetic change
تبدل tabaddul change, shift, turn; transformation; transmutation, conversion
تبادل tabādul (mutual) exchange│ تبادل السالم t. as-salam exchange of greetings, الخواطر تبادل thought transference, telepathy
 استبدال istibdāl exchange, replacement, substitution
مبدل mubdil: االسطوانات مبدل m. al- usṯuwānāt automatic record changer
متبادل mutabādil mutual, reciprocal
بدن baduna u and badana u to be fat, corpulent
abdun ابدن abdān, ابدان pl. badan بدن
body, trunk, torso
بدني badani bodily, corporal, physical, somatic
بدانة badāna corpulence, obesity
بدين badīn pl. بدن budun stout, corpulent, fat, obese
بدونة budūna corpulence, obesity
بادن bādin pl. بدن budn stout, corpulent, fat, obese
بده badaha a to come, descend suddenly (ه upon s.o.), befall unexpectedly (ه s.o.); to surprise (ه s.o.) with s.th. (ب) III to appear suddenly, unexpectedly (ه ب before
s.o. with s.th.) VIII to extemporize, improvise, do offhand, on the spur of the moment (ھ s.th.)
بداھة badāha spontaneity, spontaneous occurrence, impulse; simple, natural way, naturalness, matter-of-factness; بداھة badāhatan and بالبداھة all by itself, spontaneously
بديھة badīha s.th. sudden or unexpected; improvisation; impulse, inspiration, spontaneous intuition; intuitive understanding or insight, empathy, instinctive grasp, perceptive faculty│على البداھية all by itself, spontaneously; offhand; البديھة حاضر quick-witted, quick at repartee; حاضرة بديھة  presence of mind
بديھي badīhī and بدھي badahī intuitive, self-evident, a priori (adj.)
بديھية badīhīya pl. -āt an axiom, a fundamental or self-evident truth; truism, commonplace, platitude
بدائه badii'ih' fundamental or selfevident truths
(بدا (بدو badā u to appear, show, become evident, clear, plain or manifest, come to light; to be obvious; to seem good,
acceptable, proper (ل to s.o.) III to shaw, display, evince, manifest, reveal, declare openly│بالعداوة بادى (‘adāwa) to show open hostility IV to disclose, reveal, manifest, show, display, evince (ھ s.th.), to demonstrate, bring out, bring to light, make visible (ھ s.th.); to express, utter, voice (ھ s.th.)│ في رأيه ابدى (ra'yahū) to express one's opinion about; رغبة ابدى (ragbatan) to expreas a wish or desire V = I, to live in the desert VI to pose as a Bedouin
بدو badw desert; nomads, Bedouins
بدوي badawī Bedouin, nomadic; rural (as distinguished from urban); a Bedouin
بدوية badawīya pl. -āt Bedouin woman,
Bedouin girl
بداة badaJl pl. بدوات badawāt whim, caprice; ill-humor
بداوة badāwa and bidāwa desert life,
Bedouin life; Bedouinism, nomadism 47
بيداء baidā’  desert, steppe, wilderness, wild
ابداء ibdā’ expression, manifestation, declaration
باد bādin apparent, evident, obvious, plain, visible; inhabiting the desert; pl. بداة budāh Bedouins
بادية bādiya desert, semidesert, steppe; peasantry; (pl. بواد bawādin) nomads,
Bdouins
بداءة =  bidāya  بداية
بذ badda u (badd) to get the better of (ه), beat, surpass (s.o.)
بذ badd and bādd slovenly, untidy, shabby, filthy, squalid
بذاذة  badāda slovenliness, untidiness, shabbiness, dirtiness, filth
بذأ  bada’a a to revile, abuse (على s.o.), rail ( على at s.o.); -- بذئ badi’a a, بذؤ badu’a u to be obscene, bawdy
بذئ badī’ disgusting, loathsome, nauseous, foul, dirty, obscene, bawdy, ribald
 بذاء badā’ and بذاءة badā’a obscenity, ribaldry, foulness (of language); disgust, loathing, aversion, contempt
بذخ badaḳa a to be haughty, proud
بذخ badaḳ luxury, pomp, splendor; haughtiness, pride
باذخ bādiḳ pl. بواذخ bawādiḳ  high, lofty; proud, haughty
بذر badara u (badr) to sow, disseminate (ھ s.th., seed, also fig. = to spread) II to waste, squander, dissipate (ھ s.th.)
بذر badr pl. بذور budūr, بذار bidār seeds, seed; seedling; pl. بذور pips, pits, stones (of fruit)
بذرة badra (n. un.) a seed, a grain; pip, pit, stone (of fruit); germ; (fig.) germ cell (of a development, and the like)
بذار bidār seedtime
تبذير tabdīr waste, squandering, dissipation
مبذر mubaddir squanderer, wastrel, spendthrift
بيذق  look up alphabetically
بذل badala i u (badl) to give or spend freely, generously (ھ s.th.); to sacrifice (ھ s.th.); to expend (ھ s.th.); to offer, grant (ھ s.th.)│ جھده بذل (jahdahū) to take pains; بذل مجھودا do.; مساعدة كل بذل (kulla musā‘adatin) to grant every assistance; بذل المساعى to make efforts; ل الطاعة بذل to obey s.o., defer to s.o.; غال كل بذل (kulla gālin) and سبيل في والرخيص الغالى بذل to spare no effort, go to any length, give everything, pay any price for or in order to; ماء بذل وجھه (mā’a wajhihī) to sacrifice one's honor; (فالن عن or) فالن دون نفسه بذل to sacrifice o.s. for s.o.; وسعه بذل (wus‘ahū) to do one’s utmost, do one’s best V to fritter away one’s fortune, be over-generous; to prostitute o.s. (woman); to display common, vulgar manners VIII to wear out in common service, make trite, vulgar, commonplace, to hackney (ھ s.th.); to abuse (ھ s.th.); to express o.s. in a vulgar manner, use vulgar language; نفسه ابتذل to degrade o.s. demean o.s., sacrifice one's dignity
بذل badl giving, spending; sacrifice, surrender, abandonment; expenditure; offering, granting
بذلة badla suit (of clothes)
مبذل mibdal pl. مباذل mabādil  slipper; pl. مباذل casual clothing worn around home│ مباذله في فالن so-and-so in his private life
ابتذال ibtidāl triteners, commonness, commonplaceness; banality; debasement, degradation
باذل bādil spender 48
متبذل mutabaddil vulgar, common
مبتذل mubtadal trite, hackneyed, banal, common, vulgar; everyday, commonplace (adj.)
  بر barra (1st pers. perf. barirtu, barartu) a I (birr) to be reverent, dutiful, devoted; to be kind (ه or ب to s.o.); to be charitable, beneficent, do good (ب to s.o.); to obey (ه s.o., esp. God); to treat with reverence, to honor (ب or ه the parents); to be honest, truthful; to be true, valid (sworn statement); to keep (ب a promise, an oath) II to warrant, justify, vindicate; to acquit, absolve, exonerate, exculpate, clear (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.)│ وجھه برر (wajhahū) to justify
o.s. by IV to carry out, fulfill (ھ s.th., a promise, an oath) V to justify o.s.; to be justified
بر birr reverence, piety; righteousness, probity; godliness, devoutness; kindness; charitable gift
بر barr and بار bārr pl. ابرار abrār and بررة barara reverent, dutiful (ب toward), devoted (ب to); pious, godly, upright, righteous.; kind
مبرة mabarra pl. -āt and مبار mabar  good deed, act of charity, benefaction; philanthropic organization; charitable institution, home or hospital set up with private funds
تبرير tabrīr justification, vindication
بار bārr reverent, faithful and devoted; see also under بر barr above
مبرور mabrūr (accepted into the grace of the Lord, i.e.) blessed (said of a deceased person)
 مبرر mubarrir pl. -āt justification; excuse│له مبرر ال (mubarrira) unjustifiable
  بر barr land (as opposed to sea), terra firma, mainland; open country; برا barran out, outside│ وبحرا برا barran wa-baḥran by land and sea
برى barrī terrestrial, land (adj.); wild (of plants and animals)│ مائية برية سيارة (sayyāra, mā’īya) amphibious vehicle
āبرية barrīya pl. برارى barāarīy open country, steppe, desert; see also   برأ
برانى barrānī outside, outer, exterior, external; foreign, alien
بر burr wheat
  برأ bara’a a (برء bar’) to create (ھ s.th., said of God)
برء bar’ creation
برية barīya pl. -āt, برايا barāyā creation (= that which is created); creature; see also   بر.
البارى ~J~I aI-bari' the Creator (God)
  برئ bari’a a (براءة barā’a) to be or become free, be cleared (من from, esp. from guilt blame, etc., الى toward s.o.); to recover (من from an illness) II to free, clear, acquit, absolve, exculpate (ه s.o., من from suspicion, blame, guilt)│ الرجل ساحة برأ (sāḥata r-rajul) he acquitted the man IV to acquit, absolve, discharge, exculpate (ه s.o.); to cause to recover, cure, heal (ه s.o.)│ ذمته ابرأ (dimmatahū) to clear s.o. or
o.s. from guilt, exonerate s.o. or o.s. V to clear o.s. (من from suspicion, from a charge), free o.s. (من from responsibility, etc.), rid o.s. (من of); to declare o.s. innocent, wash one’s hands (من of); to be acquitted X to restore to health, cure, heal (ه s.o.); to free o.s. (من from), rid o.s. (من of)
برء bur’ and burū’ convalescence, recovery
برئ barī’ pl. ابرياء abriyā’ , براء burā’, birā’ free, exempt (من from), devoid (من of); guiltless, innocent; guileless, harmless; healthy, sound 49
براء barā’ free, exempt (من from)│ ذمته من براء (dimmatuM) he is innocent of ...
براءة barā’a being free; disavowal, withdrawal; innocence, guiltlessness; naiveté, guilelessness, artlessness; (pl. -āt) license, diploma, patent│ اختراع براءة   patent on an invention; التنفيذ براءة  exequatur (a written authorization of a consular officer, issued by the government to which he is accredited); الثقة براءة b. at- tiqa (Tun.) credentials (dipl.); براءة على harmless; without guilt, innocent
تبرئة tabri’a freeing, exemption; acquittal, absolution, discharge, exoneration
مبارأة mubāra’a mubarat, divorce by mutual consent of husband and wife, either of them waiving all claims by way of compensation (Isl. Law)
ابراء ibrā’ acquittal, absolution, release; release of a debtor from his liabilities, remission of debt (Isl. Law)
استبراء istibrā’: الحمل استبراء ist. al-ḥamal the ceremony of selecting and purifying the Host before Mass (Copt.-Chr.)
براجواى baraguwāy Paraguay
البرازيل al-bərāzīl Brazil
براسيرى (Fr. brasserie) brāseri beer parlor, taproom
Prague براغ
برافان (Fr. paravent) baravān folding screen
براھما bərahmā Brahma
بربة birba and بربا birbā pl. برابى barābī ancient Egyptian temple, temple ruins doting back to ancient Egypt (eg.); labyrinth, maze
بربخ barbaḳ pl. برابخ barābiḳ  water pipe, drain, culvert, sewer pipe
بربر barbara to babble noisily (e.g., a large crowd), jabber, mutter, prattle
البربر al-barbar the Berbers
بربرى barbarī Berber (adj.); barbaric, uncivilized; -- (pl. برابرة barābira) a Berber; a barbarian
بربرية barbarīya barbar(ian)ism, barbarity, savagery, cruelty
متبربر mutabarbir barbaric, uncivilized
 بربيس  look up alphabetically
بربيش barbīš (syr.) tube (of a narghile, of an enema, etc.)
بربط barbata to splash, paddle, dabble (in water)
بربونى (It. barbone) barbūnī, also بربون red mullet (Mullus barbatus; zool.)
بربة see بربى
بربيس  barbīs barbel (zool.)
برتغال burtugāl Portugal
برتغالى burtugālī Portuguese
orange burtuqān برتقان  burtuqāl, برتقال
burtuqānī برتقانى burtuqālī, برتقالى
orange, orange-colored
برثن burtun, pl. براثن barātin claw, talon
  برج V to display, show, play up her charms (woman); to adorn herself, make herself pretty (woman)
  برج burj pl. بروج burūj, ابراج abrāj tower; castle; sign of the zodiac│ الحمام برج b. al- ḥamām pigeon house, dovecot; المياه برج b. al-miyāh water tower
  بارجة bārija pl. بوارج bawārij warship, battleship; barge
  البرجاس لعبla‘b al-birjās a kind of equestrian contest, joust, tournament
  البرجيس al-birjīs Jupiter (astron.)
برجل barjal pl. براجل barāhil  compass, (pair of) dividers 50
برجمة burjuma pl. براجم barājim  knuckle, finger joint
برح bariḥa a (براح barāḥ) to leave (ھ or من a place, الى for), depart (ھ from, الى on one’s way to); with neg.: to continue to be (=
في برح ما│(زال he is still in ... ; غنيا برح ما (ganīyan) he is still rich; الخفاء برح (ḳafā’) the matter hall come out, has become generally known; وبرح غدا to come and go II to beset, harass, trouble, molest (ب s.o.) III to leave (ھ a place, الى for), depart (ھ from, الى on one's way to)
براح departure; cessation, stop; a wide, empty tract of land, vast expanse, vastness; براحا barāḥan openly and plainly, patently
تباريح tabārīh  agonies, torments (e.g., of longing, of passion)
مبارحة mubāraḥa departure
بارح bāriḥ (showing the left side. i.e.) ill-boding, inauspicious, ominous (as
opposed to البارح ؛(سانح al-bāriḥa yesterday
البارحة al-bāriḥata yesterday│ الليلة البارحة (lailata) last night; البارحة اول awwala l-b. the day before yesterday. two days ago
مبرح mubarriḥ, violent, intense, excruciating, agonizing (esp., of pains)
به مبرح mubarraḥ bihi stricken. afflicted, tormented
  برد barada u to be or become cold; to cool, cool off (also fig.); to feel cold; to cool, chill (ھ s.th.); to soothe. alleviate (ھ pain); -- baruda to be or become cold II to make cold (ھ s.th.); to refrigerate (ھ s.th.); to cool, chill (ھ s.th., also fig.); to soothe, alleviate (ھ pain) V to refresh o.s., cool
o.s. off; to be soothed, be alleviated VIII to become cold, cool off
برد bard coldness, chilliness, coolness; cooling; alleviation; cold, catarrh
برد barad hail, بردة barada (n. un.) hailstone
برود barūd collyrium
برود burūd coldness, coolness, chilliness; emotional coldness, frigidity
برودة burūda coldness, coolness, chilliness; emotional coldness, frigidity│ الدم برودة b. ad-dam cold-bloodedness
بردية bardīya ague, feverish chill; see also below
برداء buradā’   ague, feverish chill
برادة barrāda cold-storage plant; refrigerator, icebox
تبريد tabrīd cooling, chilling; cold storage, refrigeration; alleviation, mitigation│التبريد جھاد jahāz at-t. cold- storage plant, refrigerator; التبريد غرفة gurfat at-t. cold-storage room
بارد bārid cold; cool, chilly; easy; weak; stupid, inane, silly, dull; dunce, blockhead│الباردة الحرب (ḥarb) the cold
 war; باردة غنيمة an easy prey; بارد عيش (‘aiš) an easy life; باردة حجة (ḥujja) a weak argument; بارد تبغ (tibg) light, mild tobacco
مبرد mubarrid cooling, refreshing; pl.
-āt refreshments (beverages, etc.)
مبرد mubarrad cooled, chilled
 برد barada u to file (ھ a piece of metal, etc.)
براد barrād fitter (of machinery) برادة birāda fitter's trade or work برادة burāda iron filings
مبرد mibrad pl. مبارد mabcirid  file, rasp
 برد  burd pl. ابراد abrād garment
بردة burda Mohammed's outer garment
برداية burdāya curtain, drape 51
 برد IV to send by mail, to mail (ھ a letter)
(jawwī) البريد الجوىmail│ post, barīd بريد
air mail
بريدى barīdī postal; messenger, courier; mailman
 بارود look up alphabetically
 بردى bardī, burdī papyrus (bot.)
علم البردياتpapyrus│ -āt pl. bardīya بردية
‘ilm al-b. papyrology
برداق bardāq pl. براديق barādīq  jug, pitcher
البردج لعب  la‘b al-b. bridge (game)
بردخ bardaḳa to polish, burnish (ھ s.th.)
بردعة = برذعة  □ بردقان = برتقان
marjoram )مردقوش(= bardaqūš بردقوش
بردورة (Fr. bordure) badūra curbstone, curb
برذعة barda‘a pl. براذع barādi‘  saddle, pack- saddle (for donkeys and camels)
براذعى barādi‘ī maker of donkey saddle, saddler
برذون birdaun pl. براذين barādīn  work horse jade, nag
 برز baraza u to come out, show, appear, come into view, emerge; to jut out, protrude, stand out, be prominent (also fig.); to surpass, excel (على s.o.) II to cause to come out, bring out, expose, show, set off, accentuate (ھ s.th.); to excel, surpass (فى
على s.o. in), stand out (فى for), distinguish
o.s. (في by) III to meet in combat or duel (ه s.o.); to compete in a contest (ه with s.o.) IV to cause to come out, bring out, expose, make manifest (ھ s.th.); to publish, bring out (ھ a book, etc.); to present, show (ھ e.g., an identity card) V to evacuate the bowels VI to vie, contend
بروز burūz prominence, projection, protrusion
براز birāz excrement, feces; competition, contest, match (in sports); duel
بريزة buraiza (birēza; eg.) ten-piaster coin
ابرز abraz  more marked, more distinctive; more prominent
مبارزة mubāraza competition, contest, match, esp. in sports; duel; fencing
ابراز ibrāz bringing out, displaying, setting off, accentuation; production; presentation
بارز bāriz protruding, projecting, salient; raised, embossed, in relief; marked, distinct, conspicuous; prominent (personality)
مبرز mubarriz surpassing (على s.o.), superior (على to s.o.); winner. victor (in contest)
مبارز mubāriz competitor, contender; combatant, fighter; fencer
 بريز (Fr. prise) brīz pl. -āt (plug) socket, wall- plug, outlet (syr.); بريزة barīza pl. برائز barā’iz  do. (eg.)
 ابريز look up alphabetically
 برزان barazān trumpet
برزخ barzaḳ pl. برازخ barāziḳ interval, gap, break, partition, bar, obstruction; isthmus
برزوق burzūq sidewalk
 برسام birsām pleurisy
 ابريسم look up alphabetically
 برسيم birsīm clover, specif., berseem, Egyptian clover (Trifolium alexandrinum bot.)
 برش burš pl. ابراش abrāš mat
ابرش abraš  spotted, speckled 52
 برش look up alphabetically
 برشت birišt: برشت بيض (baiḍ) soft-boiled eggs
برشلونة baršīlōna Barcelona (seaport in NE Spain)
برشم baršama to stare, gaze (الى at s.th.); to rivet (ھ s.th.)
برشمة baršama riveting
برشام buršām and برشان (n. un. ة) pl. -āt wafer; Host (Chr.)
برشامة buršāma rivet برشامجى buršāmjī riveter برشمجية buršamjīya riveting
 برص bariṣa a (baraṣ) to be a leper
برص burṣ wall gecko (Tarentola mauritanica, zool.)
برص baraṣ leprosy
سام ابرصleper│ leprous; abraṣ  ابراص
sāmm a. wall gecko
 برصة burṣa stock exchange
برض baraḍa u (بروض burūḍ) to germinate, sprout (plant)
برطوز barṯūz: البحرية برطوز b. a1-baḥrīya forecastle, crew quarters (on a merchant vessel)
برطع barṯa‘a (برطعة barṯa‘a) to gallop
برطل barṯala (برطلة barṯala) to bribe (ه s.o.) II
tabarṯala to take bribes, be venal
bribe barāṯīl  براطيل pl. birṯīl برطيل
 برطم barṯama to rave, talk irrationally
برطوم burṯūm, barṯūm trunk of an elephant
 برطمان barṯamān pl. -āt (syr. eg.) tall earthen or glass vessel (for preserves, oil. etc.)
برع bara‘a a to surpass excel (ه s.o.); (also baru‘a u) to distinguish o.s., be skilful, proficient V to contribute. Give, donate (ب s.th.); to undertake (voluntarily, ب s.th.). volunteer (ب or), be prepared, willing (ب to do s.th.); to be ready, be on hand (ب with)
براعة barā‘a skill, proficiency; efficiency, capability, capacity
بروعة burū‘a superior skill, outstanding proficiency
تبرع tabarru‘ pl. -āt gift, donation; contribution
بارع bāri‘ skilled, skillful, proficient, capable. efficient; brilliant, outstanding (work of art)
برعم bar‘ama to bud, burgeon, sprout
برعم bur‘um pl. براعم barā‘im  and برعوم bur‘ūm pl. براعيم bard'im' bud, burgeon; blossom, flower
برغوث burgūt pl. براغيث barāgīt  f1ea; pl. براغيث (syr.) small silver coins│ برغوث البحر b. a1-baḥr shrimp (zool.)
برغش bargaš (coll.; n. un. ة) gnat(s), midge(s)
برغل burgul cooked, parched and crushed wheat, served together with other food (eg., syr.)
براغى pl. burgī burğų) بورغى (Turk. برغى
barāgī screw
برفير birfīr pl. برافير barāfīr  purple
بروفة look up alphabetically
 برق baraqa u to shine, glitter, sparkle, flash│ السماء برقت (samā’u) there was lightning IV
= I; to emit bolts of lightning (cloud); to flash up, light up; to brighten (face); to cable, wire, telegraph (الى to)
برق barq pl. بروق burūq lightning; flash of lightning; telegraph│ خلب برق (ḳullab) lightning without a downpour, used fig. e.g.. of s.o. given to making promises without ever living up to them 53
برقى barqī telegraphic, telegraph- (in compounds)
برقية barqīya pl. -āt telegram, wire, cable
بريق barīq pl. برائق barā’iq  glitter, shine, gloss, luster│معدني بريق ذو (ma‘dinī) lustered, coated with metallic luster
براق burāq Alborak, name of the creature on which Mohammed made his ascension to the seven heavens (معراج)
براق barrāq shining, lustrous, sparkling, flashing, glittering, twinkling
مبرق mabraq glitter, flash│الصبح مبرق فى fī m. iṣ-ṣbḥ with the first rays of the morning sun
 بارق bāriq: بارق b. al-amal glimpse of hope
بارقة bāriqa pl. بوارق bawāriq  gleam, twinkle
teletype مبرق كاتب mubriq: مبرق
  البرقة al-barqa Cyrenaica (region of E Libya)
  ابريق look up alphabetically
  استبرق look up alphabetically
برقش barqaša (برقش barqš) to variegate, paint or daub with many colors (ھ s.th.); to embellish (ھ s.th.; قوله one’s speech) II tabargaša reflex. and pass. of I
برقش birqiš finch
برقش barqaša colorful medley, variety, variegation
مبرقش mubarqaš colorful, variegated, many-colored
برقع barqa‘a to veil, drape (ھ, s.o., s.th.) II
tabarqa‘a to put on a veil, veil o.s.
برقع burqu‘ pl. براقع barāqi‘  veil (worn by women; long, leaving the eyes exposed)
برقوق barqūq (coll.; n. un. ة) plum
 برك baraka u to kneel down II and IV to make (ھ the camel) kneel down II to invoke a blessing (على or فى on s.th., ل on s.th.) III to bless (فى or ه s.th., also ل or على), invoke a blessing on; to give one's blessing (ھ to s.th.), sanction (ھ s.th.) V to be blessed (ب by); to enjoy (ب s.th.), find pleasure, delight (ب in); to ask s.o.’s (ب) blessing VI to be blessed, be praised; ... تبارك tabāraka
... God bless …! X to be blessed
بركة birka pl. برك birak pond, small lake; puddle, pool│ السباحة بركة b. as-sibāḥa swimming pool
بركة baraka pl. -āt blessing, benediction│ البركة قلةqillat al-b. misfortune, bad luck
ابرك abrak  more blessed
تبريك tabrīk pl. -āt good wish; blessing, benediction
مبارك mubārak blessed, fortunate, lucky
  براريك barārīk  (mor.) barracks
بركار birkār compass, (pair of) divideers
بركان burkān pl. براكين barākīn  volcano
بركانى burkānī volcanic
برلمان barlamān parliament
برلمانى barlamānī parliamentary
برلمانية barlamānīya parliamentarianism برلنتى (It. brillante) brillantī brilliant, diamond برلين barlīn Berlin
 برم barima a (baram) to be or become weary, tired (ب of), be fed up, be bored (ب with), find annoying, wearisome (ب s.th.) V to feel annoyed (ب by), be displeased (ب with); to be fed up (ب with), be sick and tired (بof, also من); to be impatient, discontented, dissatisfied; to grieve, be pained 54
برم barim weary, tired (ب of), disgusted (ب at, with); dissatisfied, discontented
تبرم tabarrum weariness, boredom, disgust; discontent, dissatisfaction; uneasiness, discomfort, annoyance
متبرم mutabarrim cross, peevish, vexed, annoyed
 برم barama u (barm) to twist, twine (ھ a rope); to shape (ھ s.th.) round and long; to roll up (ھ the sleeves); to settle, establish, confirm (ھ s.th.) IV to twist, twine (ھ a rope); to settle, establish, confirm (ھ s.th.); to conclude (ھ a pact); to confirm (ھ a judicial judgment); to ratify (ھ a treaty, a bill) VII to be settled, be established, be confirmed; to be twisted, be twined
برامة barrāma pl. -āt drilling machine
بريم barīm rope; string, cord, twine
بريمة barrīma pl. –āt drill, borer, gimlet, auger, bit; ○ corkscrew برم
○	بريمية barrīmīya spirochete
ابرام ibrām settlement, establishment; confirmation; conclusion (of a pact, etc.); ratification│واالبرام النقض محكمة maḥkamat an-naqḍ wa-l-i. Court of Cassation (Eg.)
مبروم mabrūm:○مبروم سلك (silk) wire rope, cable
مبرم mubram firm, strong; irrevocable, definitely established; confirmed, ratified│
 بصورة fate; inescapable (qaḍā’) قضاء مبرم irrevocably مبرمة
birām برام buram, برم pl. burma برمة 
earthenware pot
برما burmā Burma
دبابة برمائيةamphibious│ barmā’ī برمائى
(dabbāba) amphibious tank (mil.)
○	برمائية barmā’īya amphibian
wave│ permanent barmanant (Engl.)  برماننت hair) (in wave coldبرماننت على البارد
برمق barmaq pl. برامق barāmiq  baluster; spike (of a wheel)
برمھات baramhāt the seventh month of the Coptic calendar
Birmingham برمنكھام
برمودة barmūda the eighth month of the Coptic calendar
برميل barmīl pl. براميل barāmīl  barrel; keg, cask; tun
برنية barnīya pl. برانى barānīy clay vessel
برنامج barnāmaj pl. برامج barāmij  program, plan, schedule; roster, list, index; curriculum
برنجك burunjuk gauze, crepe
 برنس burnus pl. برانس barānis  (also برنوس barnūs, burnūs pl. برانيس baranīs ) burnoose, hooded cloak; casula, chasuble (of Coptic priests)│ الحمام برنس b. al- ḥammām bathrobe
برانسى barānisī pl. -īya maker of burnooses
 البرانس جبال jibāl al-barānis the Pyrenees
برنس brins prince
برنسيسة brinsēsa princess
برنط II tabarnaṯa to wear a hat
برنطية burnaiṯa pl. -āt, برانيط barānīt  (European) hat (men’s and women’s); lamp shade
برھة burha pl. burahāt, بره burah a while, a time; short time; instant, moment; برھة burllatan a little while│ برھتين (after two moments =) in a short time
□ برھم barham (syr.) = مرھم marham
برھمن barahman pl. براھمة barāhima Brahman 55
برھمية barahmīya Brahmanism
برھن barhana to prove, demonstrate (على or عن
s.th.)
برھن burhān pl. براھين barāhīn  proof
برھنة barhana proving, demonstration
بروة bawa waste, scrap
بروتستانتي brotostantī Protestant; (pl. -ūn) a Protestant
بروتستانتية brotostantīya Protestantism
بروتستو (It. protesto) brotostō protest (of a bill of exchange)
بورتوكول brotokōl protocol
proton بروتون
بوجرام brogrām program
بروجى burūjī pl. -īya trumpeter, bugler
بروز barwaza to frame
برواز barwāz, birwāz pl. براويز barāwīz  frame
بروسيا (It. Prussia) burūsiyā Prussia
بروسي burūsī Prussian
بروفة and بروڤة (It. prova) brōva, brōfa pl.
-āt test. experiment; proof sheet; rehearsal
برونز (Fr.) bronz bronze
العصر bronzy│ bronze, bronzi برونزى Age Bronze the (‘aṣr) البرونزى
 برى barā i (bary) to trim, shape (ھ s.th.), nib ( ھ a pen), sharpen (ھ a pencil); to scratch off, scrape off (ھ s.th.); to exhaust, tire out, wear out, emaciate, enervate (ه s.o.), sap the strength of (ه) III to vie, compete (ه with s.o.). try to outstrip (ه s.o.) VI to vie, compete, contend, be rivals; to meet in a contest, try each other’s strength (esp. in games and sports) VII to be trimmed, be nibbed, be sharpened; to defy, oppose (ل s.o.); to undertake, take in hand (ل s.th.), set out to do s.th. (ل), enter, embark (ل upon); to break forth (من from); to get going; to break out, lot fly, explode (with words, esp. in anger or excitement)
برى baran dust, earth
al-aqlām b. براية االفالم barrāya, براية
pencil sharpener
 مبراة mibrāh pocketknife
مباراة mubārāh pl. مباريات mubārayāt contest tournament, match (in games and sports); competition, rivalry
باريھا القوس اعط :بار a‘ṯi l-qausa bāriyahā give the bow to him who knows how to shape it, i.e. always ask an expert
متبار mutabārin participant in a contest, contestant, contender; competitor, rival
بر  and برأ  see برية 
بريطانيا Britain, biriṯāniyā barīṯāniyā, بريطانيا Britain Great (uẓmā) الكبرى
بريطاني barīṯānī, biriṯānī British; Britannic
 بز bazza u (bazz) to take away, steal, wrest, snatch (ه ھ from s.o. s.th.). rob, strip (ه ھ
s.o. of s.th.); to defeat, beat, outstrip, excel (ه s.o.), triumph, be victorious (ه over) VIII to take away, steal, pilfer (ھ s.th.); to take away, snatch (ھ money, من from s.o.); to rob, fleece (ه s.o.)│الناس اموال ابتز to lift money out of people’s pockets, relieve people of their money
ابتزاز ibtizāz theft, robbery; fleecing, robbing (of s.o.)
 بز bazza u to bud, burgeon
بز buzz, bizz pl. بزاز bizāz, ابزاز abzāz nipple, mammilla (of the female breast); teat, female breast 56
 بز bazz pl. بزوز buzūz linen; cloth, dry goods
بزة bizza clothing, clothes, attire; uniform│رسمية بزة (rasmīya) uniform
بزاز bazzāz draper, cloth merchant
بزازة  bizāza cloth trade
بزبوز bazbūz pl. بزابيز bazābīz  nozzle, spout
بزر bazara i (bazr) to sow
ابزار pl. seed(s); buzūr بزور pl. bizr بزر
abzār and ابازير  abāzīr  spice
بزرة bizra (n. un.) seed; kernel, pip, pit, stone (of fruit); germ
بزار bazzār seedsman
بزيرة buzaira pl. -āt spore (bot.)
بزغ bazaga u to break forth, come out; to dawn (day); to rise (sun)
بزوغ buzūg appearance, emergence; rise (of the sun)
بزق bazaqa u (bazq) to spit
بزاق buzāq spit, spittle, saliva
بزاقة bazzāqa snail; cobra
mabāziq  مبازق pl. mibzaqa مبزقة
spittoon, cuspidor
  بزلbazala u (bazl) to split (ھ s.th.); to pierce (ھ s.th.), make a hole (ھ in); to tap,broach (ھ s.th.; a cask); to puncture, tap (ه s.o.; med.); to clear, filter (ھ a liquid)
بزل bazl puncture, tapping, paracentesis
(med.)
بزال buzāl bung (of a cask)
مبزل mibzal pl. مبازل mabazil   spile, spigot, tap; cock, faucet
  بزلة (It. piselli) bizilla and بزال green peas ابزيم ibzīm pl. ابازم abāzim  buckle, clasp بزموت bizmūt bismuth
بزنطى bizanṯī Byzantine
بيزان bawāzin, بواز buzāh, بزاة pl. bāzin باز
bīzān falcon
بس bass and بسة bassa pl. بساس bassās cat
بسأ basa’a a (بسء bas’) to treat amicably (ب s.o.); to be intimate, be on familiar terms ( ب with)
بسارابيا besārābiyā Bessarabia
بسباس basbās, بسباسة basbāsa (eg.) mace (bot.); (magr.) fennel
بسبوسة basbāsa (eg.) pastry made of flour, melted butter, sugar and oil
بستيلية (Fr.) bastīliya pastilles, lozenges
 بستان bustān pl. بساتين basātīn  garden
بستانى bustānī gardener; garden (adj.); horticultural
بستنة bastana gardening, horticulture
  بستون (Fr. piston) bistōn, بستن (Engl.) bistan
pl. بساتن basātin  piston
  بستون (It. bastone) bastūnī spades (suit of playing cards)
بسخة basḳa Easter; Passion Week (Chr.)
 بسر basara u (بسور busūr) to scowl, frown; -- basara u (basr) and VIII to begin too early (ھ with), take premature action, be rash (ھ in s.th.)
بسر busr (n. un. ة) pl. بسار bisār unripe dates
bawāsīr  بواسير pl. bāsūr باسور
hemorrhoids
بسط basaṯ u (basṯ) to spread, spread out (ھ s.th.); to level, flatten (ھ s.th.); to enlarge, expand (ھ s.th.); to stretch out, extend (ھ s.th.); to unfold, unroll (ھ s.th.); to grant, offer, present (ھ s.th.); to submit, state, set forth, expound, explain (ھ s.th., ل or على to s.o.); to flog (ه s.o.; Nejd); to please delight (ه s.o.)│ ذراعيه بسط (dirā‘aihi) to spread one’s arms; 57 ل المساعدة يد بسط (yada l-musā‘ada) to extend helping hand to s.o.; المائدة بسط to lay the table; -- basuṯa u (بساطة  basāta) to be simple, openhearted, frank, candid II to spread, spread out, extend, expand (ھ s.th.); to level, flatten (ھ s.th.); to simplify, make simple (ھ s.th.) III to set forth, state, expound, explain; to be sincere (ه ب with s.th. about or in s.th.), confess frankly (ه ب to s.o. s.th.) V to be spread, be unrolled, be spread out, be extended; to speak at great length (فى about), enlarge (فى on), treat exhaustively, expound in detail (فى a theme); to be friendly, communicative, sociable, behave unceremoniously, be completely at ease│ الحديث في تبسط to talk freely, without formality VII to spread, extend, expand (intr.); to be glad, be delighted, be or become happy
بسط basṯ, extension, spreading, unrolling, unfolding; presentation, statement, explanation, exposition; cheering, delighting, delectation; amusement; (Eg.) numerator (of a fraction)│ اليد بسط b. al-yad avarice, greed, cupidity
بسطة basṯa extension, extent, expanse; size, magnitude; skill, capability, abilities; excess, abundance; (pl. -āt) statement, exposition, presentation; -- (pl. بساط bisāṯ) landing (of staircase); estrade, dais, platform (eg.)
busuṯ بسط absiṯa, ابسطة -āt, pl. bisāṯ بساط
carpet, rug│ الرحمة بساط b. ar-raḥma
winding sheet, shroud; وضع)
 طرح or) مسألة
  بسل basula u (بسالة basāla) to be brave,
البحث بساط على (mas‘alata, baḥtan) to raise a question, bring a question on the carpet, also المناقشة بساط على (b. il-munāqaša) for discussion; فيه بما البساط طوى to bring the matter to an end, settle it once and for all
بسيط basīṯ pl. بسطاء busaṯā’  simple; plain, uncomplicated; slight, little, modest, inconsiderable, trivial, trifling; البسيط name of a poetical meter; pl. بسطاء simple souls), ingenuous people│اليدين بسيط b. al-yadain (pl. بسط busuṯ) generous, openhanded
البسيطة al-basīṯa the earth, the world
بسائط basā’iṯ  elements; simple remedies, medicinal plants; basic facts
بساطة basāṯa simplicity, plainness
O ابسوطة ubsūṯa pl. اباسيط abāsīṯ  rim, felly (of a wheel)
ابسط absaṯ  simpler; wider, more extensive
تبسيط tabsīṯ simplification
انبساط inbisāṯ (n. vic. ة) extensity, extensiveness, extension; expansion, expanse; joy. delight, happiness, gaiety, cheerfulness
باسطة عضلة ‘aḍla bāsiṯa extensor (anat.)
مبسوط mabsūṯ extended, outstretched; spread out; extensive, large, sizeable; detailed, elaborate (book); cheerful, happy, gay; feeling well, in good health; (tun.) well-to-do
منبسط munbasiṯ extending, spreading; gay, happy, cheerful; level surface
بسطرمة (Turk.) basṯurma a kind of jerked, salted meat (eg.)
البوسفور al-busfūr the Bosporus
بسق basaqa a (بسوق busūq) to be high, tall, lofty, towering; to excel, surpass (ه or على s.o.)
باسق bāiq high, tall, lofty, towering
منبسق munbasiq high, tall, lofty, towering
بسكليت (Fr. bicyclette) biskilēt, baskilēt bicycle
بسكوت (It. biscotto) baskūt biscuit
بسكويت baskawīt biscuit
 fearless, intrepid V to scowl, glower X to be reckless, defy death 58
بسالة basāla courage, intrepidity استبسال istibsāl death defiance بسالة bāsil pl. بسالء busalā’ , بواسل
bawāsil  brave, fearless, intrepid
مسبسل mustabsil death-defying, heroic
  بسلةbisilla peace
بسم basam i (basm), V and VIII to smile
بسم basma pl. basamāt smile
بسام bassām smiling
مبسم mabsim, pl. مباسم mabāsim  mouth; mouthpiece, holder (for cigars, cigarettes, etc.)
ابتسام ibtisām and (n. vic.) ابتسامة pl. -āt smile
بسمل basmala to utter the invocation ﷲ بسم الرحيم الرحمن “In the name of God, the Benificent, the Merciful”
بسمل basmala utterance of the above invocation; the invocation itself
بسينة busaina kitty
بسيكولوجى psikolōjī psychological(aI)
بش bašša a (bašš, بشاشة bašāša) to display a friendly, cheerful, happy mien; to smile; to be friendly (ل to s.o.). give s.o. (ل) a smile
بشوش bašūš, baššāš  smiling, friendly, cheerful
بشاشة bašāša smile; happy mien
باش bāšš smiling, happy; friendly, kind
بشت bušt (Nejd, Baḥr., Ir.) a kind of cloak, =
‘abā’a عباءة
بشتة bišta (eg.) woolen cloak worn by Egyptian peasants
 بشر bašar i, bašira a to rejoice, be delighted, be happy (ب at s.th.) II to announce (as good news; ه ب to s.o. s.th.); to bring news (ه ب to s.o. of s.th.); to spread, propagate, preach (ب s.th.; a religion, a doctrine)│
ب نفسه بشر(nafsahū) to indulge in the happy hope that … IV to rejoice (at good news) X to rejoice, be delighted, be happy
(ب at s.th., esp. at good news), welcome, ( ب s.th.); to take as good omen (ب s.th.)│ خيرا به استبشر (ḳairan) to regard s.th. as auspicious
بشر bišr joy
بشر bušr glad tidings
بشرى bušrā glad tidings, good news
بشارة bišāra pl. -āt, بشائر bašā’ir   good news, glad tidings; annunciation, prophecy; gospel; بشائر good omens, propitious signs│ البشارة عيد ‘īd al-b. the Annunciation, the Day of Our Lady (Chr.)
بشير bašīr pl. بشراء bušarā’  bring.r of glad tidings, messenger, herald, harbinger, forerunner, precursor; evangelist (Chr.)
تبشير tabšīr announcement (of glad tidings); preaching of the Gospel; evangelization, missionary activity
تبشيري tabšīrī missionary
تباشير tabāšīr  foretokens, prognostics, omens, first signs or indications, heralds (fig.); beginnings,  dawn│ الفجر تباشير t. al- fajr the first shimmer of aurora, the first glimpse of dawn
مبشر mubaššir pl. -āt announcer, messenger (of glad tidings); evangelist (Chr.); preacher; missionary (Chr.)
مستبشر mustabšir happy, cheerful
  بشر bašara u to peel (ھ s.th.); to scrape off, shave off, scratch off (ھ s.th.); to grate, shred (ھ s.th.) III to touch (ھ s.th.), be in direct contact (ھ with s.th.); to have sexual intercourse (ه with s.o.); to attend, apply o.s. (ب or ب to s.th.), take up, take in hand, pursue, practice, carry out (ھ s.th., job, a task, etc.) 59
بشر bašar man, human being; men, mankind
بشرى bašarī human; human being; epidermal, skin (adj.)│ بشرى طبيب dermatologist
بشرة bašara outer skin, epidermis, cuticle; skin; complexion
بشرية bašarīya, mankind, human race
مبشرة mibšara pl. مباشر mabāšir  scraper, grater
 مباشرة mubāšara pursuit, practice; direct, physical cause (Isl. Law); mubāšaratan immediately, directly
(jubna) جبنة مبشورة mabšūr: مبشور
shredded cheese
مباشر mubāšir pl. -ūn direct, immediate; practitioner, pursuer, operator; director; O manager (Eg.); court usher (Syr.); (mil.) approx.: staff sergeant (Eg. 1939)│غير مباشر (iṣābāt) directs
بشروش bašrūš flamingo
بشع baši‘a a (بشاعة bašā‘a) to be ugly, loathsome II to make ugly, disfigure, distort (ھ s.th.); to disparage, run down (ھ s.th.) X to regard as ugly, find ugly or repugnant (ھ s.th.)
بشع baši‘ ugly; offensive, disgusting, distasteful, repugnant; unpleasant
بشاعة bašā‘a ugly; offensive, disgusting, distasteful, repugnant; unpleasant
بشاعة bašā‘a ugliness
ابشع abša  uglier; more repulsive
 باشق look up alphabetically
 بشقه (eg.; Turk. baška; invar.) different
بشك VIII to lie, prevaricate
بشاك baššāk liar
ابتشاك ibtišāk lie, deceit, trickery
 بشكور baškūr pl. بشاكير bašākīr  poker, fire iron
 بشكير balkir pl. بشاكير bašākīr  towel
بشلة (It.) bišilla pl. -āt bacillus
بشم bašima a (bašam) to feel nauseated, be disgusted (من by s.th.), be fed up (من with) IV to nauseate, sicken, disgust (ه s.o.)
بشم bašam surfeit, satiety, loathing, disgust
بشمار bašmār (tun.) lacework, trimmings
بشامرى bašāmirī (tun.) laceworker, lace- maker
بشمق bašmaq slipper (worn by fuqahā’ and women)
بشنة bašna (magr.) sorghum, millet
بشنس bašan the ninth month of the Coptic calendar
بشنوقة bašnūqa pl. بشانيق bašānīq  kerchief tied under the chin (pal.)
بشنين bašnīn lotus
بص baṣṣa i (baṣṣ, بصيص basī ṣ) to glow, sparkle, glitter, shine; -- (eg.) u to look
بصة baṣṣ embers
بصيص baṣīṣ glow, shine; glimpse, ray (e.g., of hope); lustrous, shining
بصائص baṣā’iṣ lustrous, shining; (eg.)
spy, detective
بصبص baṣbaṣa (بصبصة baṣbaṣa) to wag (بذنبه bi-danabihi its tail); (eg.) to ogle, make sheep’s eyes, cast amorous glances
بسخة see baṣḳa بصخة
 بصر baṣura a (baṣar) to look, see; to realize, understand, comprehend, grasp (ب s.th.) II to make (ه s.o.) understand or realize (ھ or ب s.th.), make (ه s.o.) aware (ھ or ب of s.th.); to enlighten 60 (ه ھ or ه ب s.o. on or as to s.th.); to tell, inform (ه ھ or ه ب s.o. about) IV to see (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to make out, behold, perceive, discern, notice (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), set eyes on (ه ھ), catch sight of (ه .ھ); to recognize (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to reflect (ب on). ponder (ب s.th.) V to look ( ھ at), regard (ھ s.th.); to reflect (فى on s.th.), ponder (فى s.th.) X to have the faculty of visual perception, be able to see; to be endowed with reason, be rational, reasonable, intelligent; to reflect ( فى on s.th.), ponder (فى s.th.)
بصر baṣar pl. ابصار abṣār vision, eye-sight; glance, look; insight; sight, discernment, perception│البصر قصير shortsighted, myopic; البصر لمح lamḥ al-b.glance of the eye; البصر لمح دون البصر، لمح في البصر، كلمح (dūna), البصر لمح اقل في (aqalIa) in the twinkling of an eye, in a moment, in a flash. instantly; البصر مدى على (madā) within sight; فى ب بصر له is knowledgeable, in, h. is familiar with
بصرى baṣarī optic(al), visual, ocular
بصريات baṣarīyāt optics
بصارة basāra perception, discernment; perspicacity, acuteness of the mind, sharp- wittedness
بصير baṣīr pl. بصراء buṣarā’  endowed with eyesight; acutely aware (ب of),
 having insight (ب into); possessing knowledge or understanding (ب of), discerning, discriminating, versed, knowledgeable, proficient (ب in), acquainted (ب with s.th.);
بصيرة baṣīra pl. بصائر (keen) insight, penetration, discernment, understanding, (power of) mental perception, mental vision│بصيرة عن deliberately, knowingly; من بصيرة على كان to have insight into s.th., be informed about s.th.; البصيرة نافذ discerning, clear-sighted, perspicacious, sharp-witted; البصيرة نفاذ nafād al.-b. sharp discernment, perspicacity
ابصر abṣar  more discerning
تبصرة tabṣira enlightenment; instruction, information
تبصر tabaṣṣur reflection, consideration; penetration, clear-sightedness, perspicacity
باصرة bāṣira pl. بواصر bawāṣir  eye   البصرة al-baṣra Basra (port in S Iraq) بصق baṣaqa u to spit (على on s.o.)
بصقة baṣqa (n. vic.) expectoration; (expectorated) spit, spittle, saliva
بصاق buṣaq spit, spittle, saliva
مبصقة mibṣaqa spittoon, cuspidor
بصل baṣal (coll.; n. un. ة) onion(s); bulb(s)│ الفار بصل b. al-fa’r sea onion (Scilla verna)
بصلى baṣālī bulbous
بصيلة buṣaila pl. -āt, الشعر بصيلة b. aš- ša‘r bulb of the hair (anat.)
بصم baṣama u (baṣm) to print, imprint (ھ s.th.); to stamp (ھ s.th.); to make, or leave, an imprint (ھ on)
بصمة baṣma pl. baṣamāt imprint, impression│ الختم بصمةb. al-ḳatm stamp imprint, stamp; االصابع بصمة fingerprint
بصوة baṣwa embers
بض baḍḍ tender-skinned
بضع baḍa‘a a (baḍ‘) to cut, slash or slit open ( ھ s.th.); to cut up, carve up, dissect, anatomize ( s.th.); to amputate (surg.) II to cut up, carve up, dissect, anatomize III to sleep (ھا with a woman) IV to invest
capital (ھ) profitably in a commercial enterprise V pass. of n; to trade; to shop, make purchase X to trade 61
بضع baḍ‘ amputation
بضع □biḍ‘ (commonly, with genit. pl. of
f. nouns, بضعة with genit. pl. of m. nouns; in classical Arabic بضع with both genders) some, a few, several
بضعة biḍ‘a pl. بضائع baḍā’i‘ piece (of meat); meat; see also biḍ‘ above
بضع buḍ‘ vulva
بضاعة biḍā‘a pl. بضائع baḍā’i  goods, merchandise, wares, commodities; that which s.o. has to offer, which he has to &how, with which he is endowed (also attributes, qualities)│ البضاعة قطار freight train; بضاعة من عنده ما اخرج he said what he had intended to say
mabāḍi‘  مباضع pl. mibḍa‘ مبضع
dissecting knife, scalpel
ابضاع ibḍā‘ mandate for the management of affairs (lsl. Law); partnership in a limited company, capital investment
مبضع mubḍi‘ pl. -ūn limited partner
(com.)
مستبضع mustabḍi‘ manager, managing agent (Isl. Law)
بط baṯṯ (n. un. ة) duck; بطة baṯṯa leather flask│ الساق بطة calf (of the leg)
بطؤ baṯu’a u (بطء buṯ’, بطاء biṯā’, بطاءة baṯa’a) to he slow; to he slowgoing, slow-footed, slow-paced; to tarry, linger, wait, hesitate II to retard, slow down, delay, hold up (ب على s.o. in s.th.) IV to slow down, decelerate, retard, delay, hold up (ھ s.th.); to he slow, go or drive slowly, slow down; to be late (عن for s.th., in meeting s.o.), keep s.o. (عن) waiting V to be slow, tardy (فى in) VI to he slow, leisurely, unhurried; to go, drive, act or proceed slowly, leisurely; to he slowgoing, slow-footed, slow-paced; to slow down X to find slow ( ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to have to wait a long time (ه for s.o.), be kept waiting (ه by s.o.)
بطء buṯ’ slowness, tardiness│ ببطء
slowly, leisurely, unhurriedly
 بطئ baṯI’ pl. بطاء biṯā’ slow, unhurried; slowgoing, slow-footed, slow-paced; tardy, late; sluggish, lazy; slow, gradual, imperceptible│O التردد بطىء b. at- taraddud of low frequency (el.)
ابطأ abṯa’  slower│ نوح غراب من ابطأ (gurābi nūḥ) tardier than Noah’s raven, i.e., slower than a ten years’ itch (proverbially of s.o. who ia very tardy)
ابطاء ibṯā’ slowing down, retardation, deceleration, reduction of speed; tarrying, delay; slowness│ ابطاء دون without delay
تباطؤ tabātu’ slowness; slowing down, retardation
بطارية baṯṯārīya pl. -āt battery (el. and mil.) بطاطا baṯāṯā, بطاطا baṯāṯā sweet potato, yam بطاطس baṯāṯis potatoes
بطق see بطاقة
بطبط baṯbaṯa (بطبطة baṯbaṯa) to quack (duck)
بطح baṯaḥa a (baṯḥ) to prostrate, lay low, fell, throw to the ground, throw down (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) V and VII to he prostrated, be laid low; to lie prostrate, sprawl, stretch out; to extend, stretch; to lie
ابطح abṯaḥ  flat, level; (pl. اباطح abāṯiḥ ) basin-shaped valley, wide bed of a wadi
بطحاء baṯḥā’ pl. بطاح biṯāḥ, بطحاوات baṯḥawāt basin-shaped valley; plain, level land, flatland, open country; (tun.) public square
بطيحة baṯīḥa pl. بطائح baṯā’iḥ wide bed of a stream or wadi; a stagnant, shallow and broad body of water
منبطح munbaṯiḥ prostrate; flat, level; level land, plain 62
بطيخ biṯṯīḳ, baṯṯīḳ (n. un. ة) melon, water- melon; baṯṯīḳ hub (of a wheel; syr.)
مبطخة  mabṯaḳa melon patch
  بطر baṯira a (baṯar) to be wild, wanton, reckless; to be proud, vain; to be discontented (ھ with s.th.); to disregard (ھ s.th.) IV to make reckless
بطر baṯar wantonness, cockiness, arrogance, hubris, pride, vanity
اباطرة abāṯira (pl.) bona vivants, playboys, epicures
 البطراء al-baṯrā’ Petra (ancient city of Edomites and Nabataeans; ruins now in SW Jordan)
بطرخ baṯraḳ pl. بطارخ baṯāriḳ  roe (of fish)
بطرس buṯrus Peter
stole baṯrašīn بطرشين and baṯrašīl بطرشيل
(Chr.)
بطريق biṯrīq pl. بطارقة baṯāriqa, بطاريق baṯārīq  patrician; Romaean general; penguin (zool.)
بطرك baṯrak, بطريك baṯrīk, بطريرك baṯriyark pl. بطاركة baṯārika Patriarch (as. an ecclesiastic title, Chr.)
baṯriyarkīya بطريركية baṯrakīya, بطركية
patriarchate (Chr.)
بطش baṯaša i u (baṯš) to attack with violence; to bear down on, fall upon s.o. (ب or فى); to knock out (ه s.o.); to hit, strike (ب s.th.). land with a thud (ب on)
بطش baṯš strength, power, force, violence; courage, valor, bravery; oppression, tyranny
بطشة baṯša impact
(of slip baṯā’iq  بطائق –āt, pl. biṯāqa بطاقة ticket; card; calling card, tag; paper), بطاقة شخصية card; callingبطاقة الزيارة label│ card; identity بطاقة التعريف and (šaḳṣīya) al-gidā’īya, al-mawādd b. بطاقة المواد الغذائية b. بطاقة المعايدة card; ration food بطاقة التموين card greeting al-mu‘āyada
  بطل baṯala u (buṯl, بطالن buṯlān) to be or become null, void, invalid, false, untenable, vain, futile, worthless; to be abolished, fall into disuse, become obsolete; to cease, stop, be discontinued; to be inactive. be oat of work II to thwart, foil, frustrate, make ineffective counteract, neutralize, nullify, invalidate (ھ s.th.); to abolish, cancel, annul, suppress (ھ s.th.) IV = II; to talk idly, prattle; to paralyze, immobilize, hold down, pin down (ه the opponent)
بطل buṯl nullity; uselessness, futility. vanity; falsity, falseness, untruth
 بطالة biṯāla and baṯāla idleness, inactivity; free time, time off, holidays, vacations; unemployment
بطال baṯṯāl pl. –ūn idle, inactive; unemployed, out of work
بطالن buṯlān nullity; uselessness, futility, vanity; falsity, untruth; invalidity
ابطال ibṯāl thwarting, frustration, invalidation; ruin, destruction; abolition, cancellation
باطل bāṯil nugatory, vain, futile; false, untrue; absurd, groundless, baseless; worthless; invalid, null, void; deception, lie, falsehood; بالباطل and باطال bāṯila falsely; futilely, in vain; pl. اباطيل abāṯīl  vanities, trivialities, trifles, flimflam, idle talk, prattle
مبطل mubṯil prattler, windbag; liar مبطل mubṯal nugatory, futile, vain متبطل mutabaṯṯil unemployed
  بطل baṯula u (بطالة baṯāla, بطولة buṯūla) to be brave, be heroic, be a hero
بطل baṯal pl. ابطال abṯāl brave, heroic; hero; champion, pioneer; hero, protagonist (of a narrative, etc.), lead, star 63 (of a play); champion (athlet.)│ العالم بطل b. Al-‘alam world champion
بطلة baṯala heroine (of a narrative), female lead, star (of a play); woman champion (athlet..)
بطالة baṯāla bravery, valor, heroism
بطولة buṯūla bravery, valor, heroism; leading role, starring role (theater, film); championship (athlet.)│ العالمية البطولة (‘ālamīya) and العالم بطولة b. al-‘ālam world championship (athlet.); البطولة دور the part or role of the hero, leading role
بطالسة baṯālisa Ptolemies
بطم buṯm, buṯūm terebinth (bot.)
  بطن baṯana u (baṯn, بطون bulan) to he hidden, concealed, to hide; -- baṯuna u (بطانة baṯāna) to be paunchy II to line (ھ a garment, ھ ب s.th. with); to cover the inside (ھ ب of s.th. with), hang, face, fill ( ھ ب s.th. with) IV to hide, conceal, harbor (ھ s.th.) V to be lined, have a lining (garment); to penetrate, delve (ھ into),
become absorbed, engrossed (ھ in) X to penetrate, delve (ھ into), become absorbed, engrossed (ھ in); to try to fathom (ھ s.th.); to fathom (ھ s.th.), get to the bottom of (ھ); to have profound knowledge (ھ of s.th.), know thoroughly, know inside out (ھ s.th.)
بطن baṯn pl. بطون buṯūn, ابطن abṯun belly, stomach, abdomen; womb; interior, inside, inner portion; depth│ القدم بطن b. al-qadam sole of the foot; الكف بطن b. al- kaff palm of the hand; البطن رقص and رقص البطون raqṣ al-b. belly dance; بطن فى (baṯni) in, within, in the midst of; بطون فى
inside, within, in; واحدا بطنا ولدت  (waladat) she gave birth only once; لظھر بطنا (li- ẓahrin) upside down
بطنى baṯnī ventral, abdominal
بطن baṯin paunchy
بطنة biṯna gluttony; overeating, indigestion
بطان biṯān pl. ابطنة abṯina girth (of a camel)
بطانة biṯāna pl. بطائن baṯā’in  inside, inner side; lining (of a garment); retinue, suite, entourage│ بطانة فى among, amidst; within
بطين baṯīn pl. بطان biṯān and مبطان mibṯān, paunchy, fat, corpulent, stout; gluttonous
بطين buṯain ventricle (of the heart; anat.)
baṯāṯīn  بطاطين -āt, pl. baṯṯānīya بطانية
cover; blanket; quilt
باطن bāṯin pl. بواطن bawāṯin  inner, interior, inward, inmost, intrinsic; hidden, secret; الباطنة coastal plain of E Oman; باطنا bāṯinan inwardly, secretly│ الكف باطن b.
al-kaff palm of the hand; القدم باطن b. al- qadam sole of the foot; االمر باطن فى at bottom, after all, really; االمر بواطن the factors, circumstances or reasons at the bottom of s.th.; االرض بواطن b. al-arḍ the secret depths of the earth
باطني bāṯinī internal│ باطني مرض (maraḍ) internal disease; الباطني الطب (ṯibb) internal medicine
الباطنية al-bāṯinīya name of a school of thought in Islam, characterized by
 divining a hidden, secret meaning in the revealed texts
مبطون mabṯūn affected with a gastric or intestinal ailment
مبطن mubaṯṯan lined; filled (ب with)
  بطن II (tun.) to full (ھ s.th.)
باطان (Span. batán) bāṯān fulling mill
باطية bāṯiya pl. بواط bawāṯin pitcher, jug بظ baẓẓa u to spout, gush out, well out بظر baẓr pl. بظور buẓur clitoris (anat.) 64
بعبع bu‘bu‘ pl. بعابع ba‘ābi‘  bugaboo, bogey
بعث ba‘ata a (ba‘t) to send, send out, dispatah (ب الى or ه ھ، s.o. or s.th. to); to forward ( ب الى or ھ s.th. to); to delegate (ب or الى ه
s.o. to); to emit (ب or ھ s. th.); to evoke, arouse, call forth, awaken (ھ s.th.); to stir up, provoke, bring on (ھ s.th.); to revive, resuscitate (ھ s.th.); to resurrect (ه s.o., من الموت from death); to incite, induce (على to s.th.), instigate, (على s.th.); to cause (على s.th.; e.g., astonishment)│الخوف ھزة اليه بعث (hazzat al-ḳauf) to scare the wits out of s.o.; في الحياة روح بعث (rūḥa l-ḥayāh) to breathe life into s.th. or s.o., revive s.th. VII to be Bent out, be emitted, be dispatched, be delegated; to be triggered, be caused, be provoked; to be resurrected (الموت من from death); to originate (من in), come (من from), be caused (من by); to emanate (fragrance); to arise, spring, proceed, develop (من from), grow out of ( من); to set out to do s.th. (with foll. imperf.) VIII to send, dispatch (ه s.o.)
بعث ba‘t sending out, emission, dispatching, delegation, etc.; resurrection; pl. بعوث bu‘ūt delegations, deputations│ البعث حزب ḥizb al-b. approx.: Renaissance Party, a political party with strong socialist tendencies; البعث يوم Day of Resurrection (from the dead)
بعثة ba‘ta pl. ba‘atāt delegation, deputation, mission; expedition; student exchange; group of exchange students; revival, rebirth, renaissance, rise│ بعثة عسكرية (‘askarīya) military mission; بعثة دبلوماسية diplomatic mission; اثرية بعثة (atarīya) archaeological expedition; رئيس البعثة ra’īs al-b. chief of mission (dipl.)
باعوث bā‘ūt Easter (Chr.)
مبعث mab‘at sending, forwarding, dispatch; emission; awakening, arousal; -- (pl. مباعث mabā‘it ) cause; factor
باعث bā‘it pl. بواعث bawā‘it  incentive, inducement, motive, spur, reason, cause, occasion
مبعوث mab‘ūt dispatched, delegated; envoy, delegate; representative, deputy (in the Ottoman Empire)
منبعث munba‘at source, point of origin
بعثر ba‘tara (بعثرة ba‘tara) to scatter, strew around, fling about (ھ s.th.); to disarrange, throw into disorder (ھ s.th.); to squander, waste, dissipate (ھ s.th.) II tabatara pass.
مبعثر muba‘tar scattered, widespread
بعج ba‘aja a (ba‘j) to slit open (ھ the belly); to groove, dent, notch (ھ s.th.) VII to have indentations or notches; to be bruised, dented, bumpy; to get battered
منبعج munba‘ij notched, indented
بعد ba‘uda u (bu'd) to be distant, far away, far off; to keep away, keep one’s distance (عن from); to go far beyond (عن), exceed by far (عن s.th.); to be remote, improbable, unlikely│عن به بعد he kept him away from; ان يبعد ال it is not unlikely that ... II to remove (ه s.o.); to banish, exile, expatriate (ه s.o.) III to cause a separation (بين between)│الشيء وبين فالن بين باعد to prevent
s.o. from attaining s.th.; اجفانه بين باعد (ajfānihī) to stare wide-eyed IV to remove (ھ s.th.); to take away (ھ s.th.); to eliminate (ھ s.th.), do away with (ھ); to send away, dismiss (ه s.o.); to expatriate, banish, exile (ه s.o.); to exclude, make unlikely, improbable, impossible (ھ s.th.); to go or move far away; to go very far (فى in or with s.th.) VI to be separated, lie apart, lie at some distance from one another; to separate, part company, become estranged; to move away, go away, withdraw, depart (عن from); to keep away, keep one’s distance (عن from); to quit, leave, avoid (عن s.th.); to follow in regular 65
 









































intervals VIII to move or go away; to keep away, withdraw (عن from); to quit, leave, avoid (عن s.th.); to leave out of consideration, disregard (عن s.th.) X to single out, set aside (ھ s.th.); to think remote, farfetched (ھ s.th.); to regard as unlikely (ھ s.th.); to disqualify (ه s.o.)
بعد bu‘d remoteness, farness; (pl. ابعاد ab‘ād) distance; dimension; interval (mus.)│ بعد على and البعد على in the distance, far off; متر مئة بعد على at a distance of 100 meters; بعد عن and بعد من from a distance, from afar; ابعاد ثالثة ذو three-dimensional; االبعاد قياس qiyās al-a. linear measure; بعد الھمة b. al-himma high aspirations,  loftiness of purpose; الشقة بعد b. aš-šiqqa wide interval, wide gap; الصيت بعد b. aṣ-ṣīt renown, fame, celebrity; الصوت بعد b. aṣ- ṣaut do.; النظر بعد b. an-naẓar far sightedness, foresight; بعدا bu‘dan li away with ... !
بعد ba‘du then, thereupon; afterwards, later, after that, in the following; still, yet│ بعد فيما afterwards, later; بعد اما see  اما؛ صغير بعد ھو he is only a small boy, be is still young; بعد يأت لم (ya’ti) he hasn’t come yet
بعد ba‘da (prep.) after; in addition to, beside; aside from│ كونه بعد ... (kaunihī) aside from the fact that he is ... ; ذلك بعد afterwards, after that, later (on); besides, moreover; ذاك بعد besides, moreover; ان بعد ba‘da an (conj.) after; اذ (id), ما بعد and من ما بعد (ba‘di) do.; سفه بعده ما سفه (safahun) the height of stupidity
بعدئذ ba‘da’idin then, thereafter, thereupon, after that, afterwards
بعيد ba‘īd pl. بعداء bu‘adā’, بعد bu‘ud, بعدان ba‘dān, بعاد bi‘ād distant, far away, fur (or from); remote, outlying, out-of-the- way; far-reaching, extensive; farfetched, improbable, unlikely; unusual, strange, odd, queer; incompatible, inconsistent (عن with)│ بعيد من from afar, from a distance; بعيد عھد منذ (‘ahd) along time ago; االثر بعيد
b. al-atar of far-reaching consequence; بعيد التاريخ remote in time, going way back in history, ancient; الشأر بعيد b. aš-ša’w high- minded, bold; الشقة بعيد b. aš-šiqqa far apart; الغور بعيد b. al-gaur deep; unfathomable; المدى بعيد b. al-madā long- distance, long-range; extensive, far- reaching; النظر بعيد b. an-naẓar farsighted; farseeing; المنال بعيد b. al-manāl hardly attainable, hard to get at; بعيدا ذھب to go far away, go to distant land.; بعيد الى تطلع to look off into the distance
 بعيد bu'aida (prep.) shortly after, soon after
ابعد ab‘ad  pl. اباعد abā‘d  farther, remoter, more distant; more extensive; less likely, more improbable; pl. اباعد abā‘d  very distant relative│االبعد الشرق (šarq) the Far East; االبعد the absent one (used as a polite periphrasis for s.o. who is being criticized or blamed for s.th.; also when referring to the 1st and 2  persons)
ابعادية ab‘adīya pl. -āt country estate
تبعيد tab‘īd banishment
بعاد bi‘ād distance
مباعدة mubā‘ada sowing of dissension, estrangement, alienation
ابعاد ib‘ād removal, separation, isolation; elimination; expatriation, banishment, deportation
تباعد tabā‘ud interdistance; mutual estrangement
مبعد mub‘ad deported; deportee
في فترات separate│ mutabā‘id متباعد في فترات intervals; wide in (fatarāt) متباعدة infrequent at (zaman) متباعدة من الزمن time to time from intervals,
مستبعد mustab‘ad improbable, unlikely 66
  بعر ba‘r, ba‘ar, droppings, dung (of animals)
اباعر bu‘ran, بعران ab‘ira, ابعرة pl. ba‘īr بعير  
abā‘ir , بعارين ba‘ārīn  camel
بعزق ba‘zaqa (بعزقة ba‘zaqa) to scatter, dissipate, squander, waste (ھ s.th.)
مبعزق muba'ziq squanderer, spendthrift, wastrel
بعض II to divide into parts or portions (ھ s.th.)
V to be divided, be divisible
بعض ba‘ḍ part, portion; one; some, a few; a little of, some of│ العلماء بعض b.
al-‘ulamā’ one (or Borne) of the scholars; بعض فوق بعضھم رفعنا (rafa‘na) we have exalted some of them above the others; اآلخر البعض—البعض some—some, a few others; بعضا بعضھم one another, each other, mutually, reciprocally; بعض فى بعضه one in the other, within one another; الشيء بعض ba‘ḍa š-šai’ to some extent, somewhat, a
little, rather; المماثلة بعض ماثلة (ba‘ḍa l-m.) he resembled him somewhat, to some extent; قرن وبعض قرن منذ (qarn) for the last hundred years and more
بعوض ba‘ūḍ (n. un. ة) gnats, mosquitoes
تبعيض tab‘īḍ division, partition. portioning
بعكوكة bu‘kūka club, society
بعل ba‘l the god Baal; land or plants thriving on natural water supply; -- (pl. بعول bu‘ū, بعولة bu‘ūla) lord; husband
بعلة ba'w wife
بعلى ba‘l, unirrigated (land. plants)
بعلبك ba‘lbakk  Baalbek (ancient Heliopolis, village in E Lebanon)
بغت bagata a (bagt, بغتة bagta) to come unexpectedly, descend unawares (ه upon s.o.) III do.; to surprise (. s.o.) VII to be taken by surprise; to be taken aback, be aghast, he nonplused
بغتة bagta surprising event, surprise; bagtatan, بغتة على bagtatin all of a sudden, suddenly, surprisingly
مباغتة mubāgata sudden arrival, surprising incident or event, surprise; sudden attack, raid
بغاث bugāt pl. بغثان bigtan small birds
بوغادة see بغادة
بغدد II tabagdada to swagger, throw one's weight around, be fresh (properly, to behave like one from Baghdad)
بغداد bagdād  Baghdad
بغدادى bagdādī pl. -ūn, بغاددة bagādida a native of Baghdad
  بغش bagaša a: السماء بغشت (samā’u) there was a light shower
بغشة bagša light rain shower
بقشة = bugša بغشة 
 بغاشة bagāša stuffed pastry made of flour, eggs and butter
بغض bagiḍa a, baguḍa u (bugḍ, بغاضة bagāḍa) to be hated, hateful, odious II to make (ه s.o.) hateful (الى to s.o.) III to loathe, detest, hate (ه s.o.) IV to loathe, detest, hate (ه s.o.) VI to hate each other
 بغضاء and bigḍa بغضة bugḍ, بغض
bagḍā’  hatred, hate
بغيض bagīḍ, hateful, odious (الى to s.o.), loathsome, abominable
تباغض tabāguḍ mutual hatred
مبغوض mabgūḍ detested, hateful, odious
مبغض mubgiḍ pl. -ūn hater; -- mubgaḍ
detested, hateful, odious
بغلة mule; abgal ابغال bigāl, بغال pl. bagl بغل
bagla pl. bagalāt female mule│ القنطرة بغال
b. al-qanṯara the piers of the bridge
بغال baggāl pl. -ūn mule driver, muleteer 67
بغى bagā i (بغاء bugā’) to seek, desire, covet, seek to attain (ھ s.th.), wish for s.th. (ھ);
-- (bagy) to wrong, treat unjustly (على s.o.)
, to oppress (على s.o.), commit outrage ( على upon); to whore, fornicate VII ينبغى it is desirable, necessary; it is proper, appropriate, seemly, it ought to be, should be; with له: it behooves him, with عليه: he must, he should, he ought to VIII to seek, desire (ھ s.th.), aspire (ھ to s.th.), strive ( ھ for)
بغى bagy infringement, outrage, injustice, wrong
بغى bagīy pl. بغايا bagāyā whore, prostitute
بغية bugya object of desire, wish, desire, bugyata (prep.) with the aim of, for the purpose of
بغاء bigā’ prostitution
بغاء bugā’ wish(ing), desire, endeavor, effort
مبغى mabgan pl. مباغ mabāgin brothel
مباغ mabāgin coveted things, desiderata, wishes, desires
ابتغاء ibtigā’ desire, wish; ibtigā’a
(prep.) for the purpose of
باغ bāgin pl. بغاة bugāh desiring, coveting, striving; committing outrages, oppressive, unjust; oppressor, tyrant
مبتغى mubtagan aspired goal, aspiration, desire, endeavor, effort
بفتة bafta calico, Indian cotton cloth
بفتيك biftēk beefsteak
  بق baqq (n. un. ة) bedbug, chinch│البق شجرة
elm (bol.)
  بق baqqa u (baqq) to give off in abundance
بقاق baqqāq garrulous, loquacious, chatterbox, prattler
بقبق baqbaqa (بقبقة baqbaqa) to gurgle, bubble, splutter, purl (water); to chatter, prattle
بقباق baqbāq garrulous, loquacious, chatterbox, prattler
بقبوقة baqbūqa blister (of the skin)
بقجة buqja pl. بقج buqaj bundle, pack, package
بقدونس baqdūnis, baqdūnas parsley
بقر baqara u to split open, rip open, cut open (
ھ s.th.) IV do.
بقر baqar (coll.) bovines, cattle; n. un.
بقرة baqara pl. -āt cow
بقرى baqarī bovine, cattle-, cow- (in compounds)
بقار baqqār pl. ة cowhand, cowboy
بقس baqs box, boxwood (bot.)
بقسمات buqsumāt rusk, zwieback; biscuit
بقشة buqša Yemenite copper coin
بقشيش baqšīš pl. بقاشيش baqāšīš  present of money; tip, gratuity, baksheesh
بقع II to spot, stain, smudge; (ھ s.th.) V to become stained, get smudged; to be spotted, stained
بقعة buq‘a pl. بقع buqa‘, بقاع biqā‘ spot, blot, smudge, stain; place, spot, site, plot. patch, lot
ابقع abqa‘  spotted, speckled
باقعة bāqi‘a pl. بواقع bawāqi‘ sly dog, shrewd fellow
بقل baqala u (baql) to sprout (plant)
بقل  baql (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. بقول buqūl, ابقال abqāl herbs, potherbs, greens, herbaceous plants, specif., legumes│ البقلية الفصيلة the Leguminosae; الباردة البقلة hyacinth bean (Dolichos lablab L.), الحمقاء البقلة (ḥamqā’) purslane (bot.), الذھبية البقلة (dahabīya) garden orach (bot.), الخطاطيف بقلة  celandine (bot.), الملك بقلة b. al-malik common fumitory (bot.) 68
 بقال baqqāl pl. -ūn بقالة baqqāla
greengrocer; grocer
بقالة  biqāla the grocery business
بقالوة baqlāwa, بقالوا a kind of Turkish delight, pastry made of puff paste with honey and almonds or pistachios
بقام baqqām brazilwood
بقي baqiya a (بقاء baqā’) to remain, stay, continue to be (على in a state or condition); to keep up, maintain (على a state or condition); to be left behind, be left over; to last, continue, go on; (with foll. imperf. or part.) to continue to do s.th., keep doing s.th.; to become│طفال يبق لم (yabqa ṯiflan) he is no longer a child II to leave, leave over, leave behind (ھ s.th.) IV to make (ه s.o.) stay; to retain, leave unchanged, leave as it is, preserve, maintain, keep up ( ھ s.th.); to leave, leave over, leave behind (ھ s.th. ه s.o.); to leave untouched, save, spare (على s.o., s.th., e.g., s.o.’s life) V to remain, stay, continue to be (على in a state or condition); to be left, be left over X to make stay, ask to stay, hold back, detain (ه s.o.); to spare, save, protect (ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to preserve (ھ s.th.); to retain, keep (ھ s.th.); to store, put away (ھ s.th.)
بقية baqīya pl. بقايا baqāyā remainder, rest; remnant, residue│ الدول بقية b. ad- duwal the remaining countries, the rest of the countries; الباقية البقية (bāqiya) the last remnant
بقاء baqā’ remaining, staying, lingering, abiding; continuation, continuance, duration; survival, continuation of existence after life; immortality, eternal life; existence; permanence│البقاء دار the hereafter
ابقى abqā more lasting. more durable. more permanent; better preserving; conducive to longer wear. better protecting
ابقاء ibqā’ continuation, retention; maintenance, conservation, preservation│ عليه كانت ما على الحالة ابقاء maintenance of the status quo
استبقاء istibqā’ continuation, retention; maintenance, conservation, preservation
باق bāqin staying; remaining; left;	بكرة bakra: ابيھم بكرة على ‘alā bakrati
remainder (arith.); lasting, continuing,
 abīhim,
 all عن بكرتھم and عن بكرة ابيھم
permanent, unending; surviving; living on; everlasting, eternal (God)│ الباقيات الصالحات the good works
متبق mutabaqqin residue, remnant, remainder, rest
بك bē (Eg. pronunciation) pl. بكوات bakawāt, بھوات bahawāt bey (title of courtesy; cf. بيك)
بكوية bekawīya rank of a bey
بكيء bakī’ pl. بكاء bikā’ having or giving little, sparing (e.g., of words)
بكاسين bikāsīn bécassine, snipe (zool.)
بكالوريا (Fr. baccalauréat) bakālōriyā
baccalaureate, bachelor’s degree
بكالوريوس bakālōriyūs bachelor (academic degree)
بكباشى (Turk. binbaşı) bimbāšī, bikbāšī major (mil; formerly, Eg.)
بكت to censure, blame (ه s.o.)
تبكيت reproach│ blame, tabkīt تبكيت remorse الضمير
بكتيرى baktērī bacterial, caused by bacteria
بكتيريا baktēriyā bacteria
بكر bakara u to set out early in the morning, get up early; to come early (الى to), be early (الى at) II do.; فى بكر and ب بكر with foll. verbal noun: to do s.th. early, prematurely, ahead of its time III to be ahead of s.o. (ه), anticipate, forestall (ه s.o.) IV = I; VIII to be the first to take (ھ s.th.), be the first to embark (٩٦ ھ on s.th.); to deflower (ھا a girl): to invent (ھ s.th.); to create, originate, start (ھ s.th.)
bukrān بكران abkur, ابكر pl. bakr بكر
young camel
بكر bikr pl. ابكار abkār first-born, eldest; firstling: unprecedented, novel, new; virgin; virginal
بكرى bikrī first-born, first
بكرية bikrīya primogeniture
بكرة bakra and bakara pl. بكر bakar, -āt reel; pulley (mech.); spool, coil; winch, windlass│ بكرة خيط ḳaiṯ b. thread
 without exception, all of them, all together; بكرتھا عن الجماھير خرجت the crowd went forth as one man
بكرة bukra pl. بكر bukar early morning; بكرة bukratan early in the morning; tomorrow; on the following day, next day
بكير bakīr coming early; early, premature; precocious
بكور bakūr and باكور bākūr coming early; early, premature; precocious
بكور bukūr earliness, prematureness, premature arrival│ العود فى بكورى (‘aud) my early return
بكارة bakāara virginity
بكارة bakkāra pulley (mech.)│ مركبة بكارة (murakkaba) set of pulleys, block and tackle
bukūrīya بكورية and bukūra بكورة
primogeniture
باكورة bakūra pl. بواكير bawākīr  firstlings; first results, first fruits; beginning, rise, dawn; (with foll. genit.) initial, early, first; pl. بواكير first signs or indications; initial symptoms; heralds, harbingers (fig.)│ الفواكه باكورة early fruit; اعماله باكورة كان the first thing he did was...
ابكر abkar  rising earlier
مبكر mibkār precocious
ابتكار ibtikār pl. -āt novelty, innovation; creation; invention; origination, first production; initiative; creativity, originality; pl. ابتكارات specif., creations of fashion, fashion designs
باكر bākir early; premature; باكرا bākiran in the morning; early (adv.)│الصباح فى الباكر (ṣabāḥ) early in the morning; الباكر الى till tomorrow
باكرة bākira pl. بواكر bawākir  firstlings, first produce, early fruits, early vegetables; pl. first indications or symptoms, heralds, harbingers
مبكر mubakkir doing early; early;│ مبكرا
mubakkiran early in the morning, early
مبتكر mubtakir creator; creative; inventor; -- mubtakar newly created,
novel, new, original; (pl. -āt) creation, specif., fashion creation, invention│ثوب مبتكر (taub) original design, model. dress creation
بكرج bakraj pl. بكارج bakārij  kettle, coffee pot
بقسمات see ,بكسماد، بكسماط
بكل II to buckle, buckle up, button up (ھ s.th.); to fold, cross (ھ the arms)
بكلة bukla pl. بكل bukal, -āt buckle
بكاله (It. baccalá) bakalāh codfish
بكلوريوس bakalōriyūs bachelor (academic degree)
بكم bakima a to be dumb: -- bakuma u to be silent, hold one’s tongue IV to silence (ه s.o.) V to become silent; to become dumb
بكم bakam dumbness
bukm بكم pl. bakmā’, بكماء f. abkam , ابكم
dumb 70
بك see بكوية and بكوات
بكى bakā i (بكاء bukā’, بكى bukan) to cry, weep (على over); to bemoan, lament, bewail (ه s.o.), mourn (ه for) II and IV to make (ه s.o.) cry X to move (ه s.o.) to tears, make ( ه s.o.) cry
بكاء bakkā’ given to weeping frequently, tearful, lachrymose
المبكى حائط ḥā’iṯ al-mabkā the Wailing Wall (in Jerusalem)
باكية bākiya pl. بواك bawākin wailing- woman, hired mourner; (eg.) arch, arcade
باك bākin pl. بكاة bukāh weeping, crying; weeper, wailer, mourner
مبك mubkin, mubakkin, causing tears, tearful; sad, lamentable, deplorable
بكين bikīn Peking
 بل bal (also with foll. و wa-) nay, --rather... ; (and) even; but, however, yet
 بل balla u (ball) to moisten, wet, make wet (ھ s.th., ه s.o.);--balla i to recover (مرض من from an illness) II to moisten, wet, make wet (ھ s.th., ه s.o.) IV to recover (مرض من from an illness) V and VIII to be moistened, be wetted; to become wet
بل ball moistening, wetting; moisture
 بل bill recovery, convalescence, recuperation
بلة billa moisture, humidity│ الطين زاد ما بلة mā zālda ṯ-ṯīna billatan what made things even worse ...
بل balal moisture, humidity; moistness, dampness, wetness
بليل balīl a moist, cool wind
بليلة balīla (eg.) dish made of stewed maize and sugar
ابالل iblāl recovery, convalescence, recuperation
بل taballul moistness, dampness, humidity
mubtall مبتل muballal, مبلل mablūl, مبلول
moist, damp, wet
 بلى billī (from Fr. bille): بلى كرسي (kursī) ball bearing
ب  see بال
platinum plātīn blātī., بالتين، پالتين
بالج (Fr. plage) blāž beach بالجرا balagrā pellagra بالرج balāraj stork
بالستيك (Fr. p1astique) blāstīk plastik
بلط see بالط
بالك (Engl. plug) spark plug (ir.)
بلن see بالن, بالنة
بلبط balbaṯa to gurgle
 بلبل balbala to disquiet, make uneasy or restive, stir up, rouse, disturb, trouble, confuse (ه s.o., ھ s.th.) II tabalbala to feel uneasy, be anxious; to be or become confused, get all mixed up
بلبلة balbala pl. بالبل balābil  anxiety, uneasiness, concern; confusion, muddle, jumble, chaos
بلبال balbāl anxiety, uneasiness, concern بالبل balabil  anxieties, apprehensions تبلبل tabalbul muddle, confusion│بلبل
االلسنة t. al-alsina confusion of tongues (at the tower of Babel)
 بلبل bulbul pl. بالبل balabil  nightingale
بلج balaja u (بلوج bulūj) to shine; to dawn (morning, aurora); -- balija a (balaj) to be happy, be glad (ب about), be delighted (ب at) IV to shine (sun) V and VII = balaja
ابلج ablaj  gay, serene, bright, clear, fair, nice, beautiful
daybreak al-fajr inbilāj انبالج الفجر
بلجيكا beljīka Belgium
بلجيكى beljīkī Belgian (adj. and n.)
بلح balaḥ (coll.; n. un. ة) dates (bot.)
بلد baluda u (بالدة balada) to be stupid, idiotic, dull-witted II to acclimatize, habituate (ھ s.th., to a country or region) V pass. of II; to become .tupid, be.otted, lapse into a state of idiocy; to show o.s. from the stupid side VI to feign stupidity
بلد balad m. and f., pl. بالد bilād country; town, city; place, community, village; بالد country; بلدان buldān countries│ الحبش بالد
b. al-ḥabaš Ethiopia; الصين بالد b. aṣ-ṣīn
China; الھند بالد b. al-hind India
بلدة balda town, city; place, community, village; rural community; township
بلدى baladī native, indigenous, home (as opposed to foreign, alien); (fellow) citizen, compatriot, countryman; a native; communal, municipal│ بلدى مجلس (majlis) city council, local council
بلدية baladīya pl. -āt township, community, rural community; ward, district (of a city); municipality, municipal council, local authority
بليد balīd and ابلد ablad  stupid, doltish, dull-witted, idiotic
بالدة balāda stupidity, silliness
تبلد taballud idiocy, dullness, obtuseness, apathy
متبلد mutaballid besotted, dull, stupid
ابليز look up alphabetically
ابليس pl. ابالسة look up alphabetically
بلسان ba1asān balsam, balm; balsam tree; black older (bot.)
بلسم balsam pl. بالسم balāsim  balsam, balm
بلسم balsamī balsamic, balmy
 بلشف balšafa to Bolshevize II tabalšafa to be Bolshevized
بلشفة balšafa Bolshevization
balāšifa بالشفة pl. bulšifī بلشفى
Bolshevist(ic); Bolshevik, Bolshevist
بلشفية bulšifīya Bolshevism
بلشون balašūn heron (zool.)
 بلص balaṣa u (balš) and II to extort wring forcibly (ه من from s.o. s.th.); to blackmail (ه s.o.)
بلص balṣ extortion, blackmail; forcible imposition of taxes
 بالص ballāṣ pl. بالليص balālīṣ  (eg.)
earthenware jar
 بلط II to pave (ھ s.th., with flagstones or tiles)
بالط balāṯ pavement, tiled floor; floor tiles; palace; pl. ابلطة abliṯa floor tiles│ الملكى البالط (malakī) the royal court; حداد البالط ḥidād al-b. court mourning
بالطة balāṯa floor tile; flagstone, slabstone; paving stone
تبليط tablīṯ paving, tile-laying
مبلط muballaṯ paved, tiled
 بلوط ballūṯ oak; acorn
 بلطة balta pl. -āt, بلط bulaṯ ax
بلطجى balṯajī pl. -īya engineer, sapper, pioneer (mil.); gangster; procurer, panderer, pimp; sponger, hanger-on, parasite
 بلطة balaṯa balata gum
 بلطو (Fr. paletot) balṯō pl. –āt, بالطى balāṯī
paletot, overcoat
 بلطى bulṯī bolti (Tilapia nilotica), a food fish of the Nile
بحر البلطيق countries│ Baltic the al-.balṯīq بلطيق
baḥr al-b. the Baltic Sea
بلوظة bālūẓa hand pres.; (eg.) a kind of cream made of cornstarch, lemon juice and honey, or the like
بلع bala‘a and bali‘a a (bal‘) to swallow, swallow up (ھ s.th.); to gulp down (ھ s.th.); to put up (ھ with s.th.), swallow, stomach, brook (ھ s.th.)│ ريقه بلع (rīqahū) lit.: to swallow one’s saliva, i.e., to catch
one’s breath, take a little rest, have a break; to restrain o.s., hold back (said of one in a rage) II and IV to make (ه s.o.) swallow (ھ s.th.)│ ريقه بلعه (rīqahū) to grant s.o. a short rest VIII = I
بلعة bal‘a large bite, big gulp
بالليع –āt, pl. ballū‘a بلوعة ballā‘a, بالعة
ba1ālī‘  sink, drain
bawālī‘  بواليع –āt, pl. bālū‘a بالوعة
sewer, sink, drain
بلعم bul‘um pl. بالعم balā‘im  and بلعوم bul‘ūm pl. بالعيم balā‘īm  pharynx (anat.);  بلعوم gullet, esophagus (anat.)
 بلغ balaga u (بلوغ bulūg) to reach (ه s.o. ھ s.th.), get (ه ھ، to), arrive (ھ at); to come, amount (ھ to), be worth (ھ so and so much); to come to s.o.’s (ه) ears; to attain puberty (boy); to ripen, mature (fruit, or the like); to come of age; to exhaust, wear out (من s.o.); to act (من upon s.o.), have its effect (من on), affect (من s.o.); to go far ( من فى، in s.th.), attain a high degree (من فى، of s.th.)│ الى به بلغto make s.o. or s.th. get to or arrive at, lead or take s.o. or s.th. to, get s.o. or s.th. to the point where, به بلغ
ان الترنح (tarannuḥ) he began to reel so violently that ... ; الجد مبلغ االمر بلغ (mablaga l-jidd) the matter became serious; السيل بلغ الزبى b. s-sailu z-zubā the matter reached a climax, things came to a head; مبلغ بلغ الرجال (mablaga r-rijāl) to be sexually mature, attain manhood, come of age; بلغ اشده (ašuddahū) to attain full maturity, come of age; to reach its climax; فى بلغ
مبلغا الشيء (mablagan) to attain a high degree of s.th.; المبلغ ھذا بذكرياتي بلغت حين (ḥīna, dikrayātī, mablaga) when I had come to this point in my reminiscences; بلغ مبلغ كل منه (kulla mablagin) to work havoc on s.o.; منتھاه بلغ (muntahāhū) to reach its climax, come to a head II to make (ه s.o.) reach or attain (ھ s.th.); to take bring (الى ھ s.th. to s.o.) see that s.th. (ھ) gets (الى to); to convey, transmit, impart, communicate, report (ه ھ to s.o. s.th.); to inform, notify (ه ھ s.o. of s.th.), tell, let know (ه ھ s.o. about); to report (عن about), give an account of (عن); to inform (عن against s.o.), report, denounce (عن s.o.)│ رسالة بلغ to fulfill a mission, سالمى بلغه ballighu salāmī give him my best regards!
 III to exaggerate (فى in s.th.); to overdo. do too long (فى s.th.); to go to greatest lengths, do one’s utmost (فى in) IV to make (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) reach or attain (الى s.th.); to make (ھ s.th.) amount (الى to), raise (ھ an amount, a salary, الى to); to inform, notify (ب or عن s.o. of s.th.), tell, let know (ب or ه عن s.o. about); to announce, state, disclose (ھ s.th.); to inform (عن against s.o.), report, denounce (عن s.o.)│ب البوليس ابلغ to report s.th. to the police V to content o.s., be content (ب with); to eke out an existence; to still one’s hunger (ب with), eat (ب s.th.): to b. delivered, be transmitted
بالغا ال سمعا sam‘an lā balāgan! may it be heard but not fulfilled, i.e. God forbid! (used at the mention of s.th. unpleasant)
بلغة bulga and بالغ balāg sufficiency, competency, adequacy (see also   بلغة below)
بالغ balāg pl. -āt communication, information, message, report; announcement, proclamation; communiqué; statement; notification (of the police)│اخير بالغ ultimatum
بليغ balīg pl. بلغاء bulagā’ eloquent; intense, lasting, deep, profound (e.g., an impression); serious, grave (e.g., an injury)
بلوغ bulūg reaching, attainment, arrival (at); maturity, legal majority
بالغة balāga eloquence; art, of good style, art of composition; literature│ علم البالغة ‘ilm al-b. rhetoric
ابلغ ablag  intenser, deeper, more lasting; more serious, graver
مبلغ mablag pl. مبالغ mabālig  amount, sum of money; extent, scope, range; (see also examples under بلغ I)│ اسمى مبلغ (ismī) nominal par; المودعة المبالغ (mūda‘a) the deposits (at a bank); الجد من قولى مبلغ ليتبين (li-yatabayyana, qaulī, jidd) in order to find, out to what extent my words were meant seriously
تبليغ tablīg pl. -āt conveyance, transmission, delivery (الى to s.o.); information (عن about); report, notification (عن of); communication,
كتاب التبليغ notice│ announcement,
credentials
مبالغة mubalaga pl. -āt exaggeration ابالغ iblāg conveyance, transmission بالغ bālig extensive, far-reaching;
considerable; serious (wound), deep, profound, violent, vehement (feelings), strong, intense; mature; of age, legally major
مبلغ muballig bearer (of news), messenger; informer, denouncer; detective
 بلغة bulga, balga pl. -āt, bulag slipper of yellow leather
بلغاريا bulgāriyā Bulgaria
بلغارى bugārī Bulgarian (adj. and n.)
بلغم balgam phlegm; (pl. بالغم balagim )
expectoration, sputum
بلغمى balgamī phlegmatic; phlegmy, mucous
بلف balafa i (balf) to bluff II do.
بلف balf, بلفة balfa bluff
ابلق ablaq  piebald
بلقيس bilqīs  Muslim name of the Queen of Sheba
البلقان al-balqān the Balkans
بلقانى balqānī Balkan
balāqi‘  بالقع pl. balqa‘a بلقعة and balqa‘ بلقع
wasteland
بلوك see بلك
بلكون balkōn balcony
 بلم balam anchovy
 بلم balam pl. ابالم ablām sailing barge (ir.)
 بلم IV to be silent, hold one's tongue
بالن ballān bathhouse attendant; name of a plant growing near stagnant waters
بالنة ballāna female bathhouse attendant; lady's maid
بلنسية balansiya  Valencia (region and city in E Spain)
بلين pl. باللين look up alphabetically
 بله baliha a to be stupid, simple-minded VI to feign foolishness, pretend to be stupid X to deem (ھ s.o.) stupid or simple-minded
بله balah and بالھة balāha stupidity, foolishness, simple-mindedness; idiocy, imbecility│مبكرة بالھة (mubakkira) dementia praecox
بله balha let alone, not to speak of, not to mention
ابله ablah  stupid, doltish, dull-witted; idiotic
بلھارسيا bilkarsiyā bilharziasis, schistosomiasis
(med.)
بلھنية bulahniya abundance, wealth, variety (of earthly possessions)
بھلوان see بلھوان 
ابو الھول (= balāhīn  بالھين pl. bulhōn بلھون 2□
eg.) sphinx
(بلو and بال (بلى balā u (balw, بالء balā’) to test, try, put to the test (ھ s.o., • s.tb.); to know from long experience (ھ s.th.); to afltict ( ھ s.o.); -- بلى baliya a (بلى bilan, بالء balā’) to be or become old, worn, shabby (clothes); to dwindle away, vanish; to deteriorate, decline, become decrepit; to disintegrate (a corpse), decay, rot, spoil III to care, be concerned (ب or ه ,ھ about), be mindful (ب or ه ,ھ of s.o., of s.th.); to pay attention (ب or ھ to), mind, heed, take into consideration, take into account (ب or ھ s.th.); to take notice (ب of)│ابالى ما mā ubālī, ابالى ال I don’t care! I don’t mind! it's all right with me! يبالى ال (as a relat. clause) unconcerned, heedless, careless, reckless IV to try, test, put to the test (ھ s.o.); to make experienced, harden, inure (ه s.o.; said of trials, experiences); to work havoc (ھ on s.th.); to wear out (ھ s.th.) │بالء ابلى حسنا (balā’an ḥasanan) to stand the test; to prove o.s. brave (in war) VIII to try, tempt, put to the test (ھ s.o.); to afflict (ب ه s.o. with), visit (ه ب on s.o. s.th.); pass. ubtuliya to become or be afflicted (ب with, by), suffer (ب from)
بلى  bilan decline, deterioration; decay, putrefaction, decomposition; worn condition; wear; shabbiness
بلي  balīy worn, old, shabby, threadbare; decrepit, dilapidated, decaying, decomposed, rotten
بلية balīya pl. باليا balāyā trial, tribulation, visitation, affliction, distress, misfortune, calamity
بالء balā’ trial. tribulation, visitation, affliction, distress, misfortune; scourge, plague; creditable performance, bravery, gallantry, heroic action│حسن بالء (ḥasan) favor, blessing, grace (of God); good performance
بلوى balwā trial; tribulation, visitation, affliction, distress, misfortune, calamity; necessity, need│البلوى عمت (‘ammat) it has become a general necessity
مباالة mubālāh consideration, regard, heed, attention│ مباالة الlā-mubālāh indifference, unconcern, carelessness
ابتالء ibtilā’ trial, tribulation, affliction, visitation
بال bālin old, worn, worn out; shabby, threadbare, ragged, tattered; decrepit, dilapidated; decayed, rotten; obsolete, antiquated
مبال mubālin observant, heedful, mindful (ب of)│ ب مبال غيرheedless of
مبتلى mubtalan (less correctly مبتل mubtalin) afflicted (ب with, by), suffering (ب from)
بلور II tabalwara to crystalize; to be crystalized; to be covered with crystals
بلور ballūr, billaur pl. -āt crystal; crystal glass, flint glass, glass│O صخرى بلور (ṣaḳrī) rock crystal, transparent quartz
بلورة billaura (n. un.) pl. -āt crystal; crystal glass, flint glass, glass; tube (radio); crystal, quartz plate (of a detector; radio); (syr., pronounced ballōra) negative (phot.)
بلورى ballūrī, billaurī crystalline; crystal (adj.)
بلورية ballūrīya, billaurīya pl. -āt lense
(opt.)
candied فواكه مبلورة mubalwar: مبلور 75 fruits
بلوز (Fr. blouse) bəlūz, bəlūza pl. –āt blouse
 بلوك (Turk. bölük) bulūk pl. -āt company (mil.; Eg.)│ امين بلوكb. amīn (mil.) approx.: quartermaster sergeant (formerly, Eg.)
بلون ballūn balloon
  بلى balā yes, yes indeed, certainly, surely
  بلى baliya etc., see بلو
بلياتشو (It. paglaccio) palyatšō clown, buffoon
بلياردو (It. bigliardo) bilyardō billiards
بليسيه bilīsēh plissé, pleating
  بلين ballīn pl. باللين balālīn  pallium, liturgical vestment of a bishop worn over the chasuble (Chr.); monk's robe (Copt.·Chr.)
  بليون balyūn pl. باليين balayīn (U.S.) billion, (G.B.) milliard; (U.S.) trillion, (G.B.) billion
بم bamm lowest string of a musical instrument
tie bow bumbāga بمباغة bumbāg, بمباغ
بمباى bombāy Bombay
بامية look up alphabetically
  بن V تبنى to adopt as son (ه s.o.); to adopt. embrace (ھ s.th.)
ابن ibn pl. ابناء abnā’, بنون  banūn son; descendant. scion; offspring, son (of a nation or people)│ آدم ابن pl. آدم بنو (son of Adam) man, human being; آوى ابن ibn āwā jackal; البلد ابن ibn a1-balad local inhabitant, native; البلد ابناء natives, native population; الحرب ابن ibn al-ḥarb warrior; soldier; warlike, bellicose; السبيل ابن wayfarer, wanderer; ٠٥ سنة خمسين ابن years old; ساعته ابن ibn sā‘atihī temporal, transient, passing; صلبه ابن ibn ṣulbihī his own son; عرس ابن ibn ‘irs weasel; ماء بنو السماء banū mā’ as-samā’ the Arsbs; بنو سويف Beni Suef (city in Egypt, S of Cairo)
ابنة ibna and بنت bint pl. بنات banāt daughter; بنت girl│ العم ابنة i. al-‘amm (female) cousin; periphrastically for wife: عمك ابنة your wife; الفك بنت b. a1-fikr pl. االفكار بنات thought, idea; االرض بنات b. a1- arḍ insects and worms; بئس بنات b. bi’s calamities, afflictions; الدھر بنات b. ad-dahr do.; الشفه بنت b. aš-šafa word; الصدر بنات b. aṣ-ṣadr worries, fears, anxieties; وردان بنات
b. wardāna earth worms, rainworms
بني bunaiya my little son
بنوة bunuwwa sonship, filiation
بنوى banawi filial
تبن tabannin adoption (also fig., e.g. of ideas, principles, etc.)
  بن bunn coffee beans, coffee
بنى bunnī coffee-colored, brown
بنان banān finger tips│ ببنان عليه يشار (yušāru lit.: he is pointed at with fingers, i.e., he is famous man; بنانك طوع انا anā tau‘a banānika I am at your disposal, I am at your service
بنادورة banādōra (syr.; from It. pomodoro) tomato(es)
بنارس banāris  Banaras or Benares (the Holy City of the Hindus, in N India)
بكباشى see بنباشى بن   see بنت
بنتو bintū napoleon, louis d'or (gold coin of 20 francs)
بنج II to dope, narcoticize (with banj; ه s.o.); to anesthetize (. s.o.)
بنج banj henbane (Hyoscyamus niger;
bot); an anesthetic, a narcotic
البنجاب al-banjāb the Punjab (region, NW Indian subcontinent)
بنجر banjar red beet (eg.)
بند band pl. بنود bunūd article, clause, paragraph (of a. la.w, contract, etc.); banner; large body of troops
بندر bandar pl. بنادر banādir  seaport; commercial center; district capital (Eg.); بنادر see also under بنديرة below│ عباس بندر ‘abbās Bandar Abbas (seaport in S Iran)
بندورة look up alphabetically
بندق bunduq (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. بنادق banādiq  hazelnut(s), filberts; hazel, hazel tree; بندقة hazelnut, filbert; bullet
بندقى bunduqī Venetian sequin
بندقية bunduqīya pl. بنادق banādiq  rifle, gun│ رش بندقية b. rašš shotgun
البندقية al.bunduqīya Venice
banādiqa بنادقة -ūn, pl. bunduqani بندقانى
a Venitian
 بندوق bundūq pl. بناديق banādīq  bastard
بندورة banadōra (syr.; from It. pomodoro)
tomatoes
بندورى احمر aḥmar  banadōrī tomato-red
بندول (Fr. pendule) bandūl pendulum
بنديرة (Span. bandera) bandēra pl. بنادر
banadir  pennon, flag, banner بنور bannūr (= بلور ballūr) glass  بنزھير banzahīr bezoar, bezoar stone بنزين banzīn, benzīn gasoline, benzine بنس (Engl.) pence
بنسلين benisilīn penicillin
بنسيه (Fr. pensée) banēh pansy (bot.)
بنسيون bansiyōn pl. -āt boardinghouse; boarding school
بنصر binṣir f., pl. بناصر banāsir  ring finger بنط bunṯ pl. بنوط bunūṯ point (stock market) بنطلون banṯalūn (from It. pantaloni) pl. –āt
trousers, pants
بنغازى bangāzī Bengasi (city in NE Libya, capital of Cyrenaica)
البنغال al-bangāl Bengal (region, NE Indian subcontinent)
بنفسج banafsaj (coll.; n. un. ة) violet (bot.)
violetish; violetlike, banafsajī بنفسجى وراء البنفسجى or فوق البنفسجى (adj.)│ violet
ultraviolet
بنفش banfaš, banafš amethyst (min.)
بنقة binaqa and بنيقة banīqa gore, gusset (of a shirt or garment)
  بنك bunk root, core, heart, best part│ العمر بنك
b. al-‘umr the prime of life, the best years
house│ banking bank, bunūk بنوك pl. bank بنك  deposit بنك التوفير bank; credit بنك التسليف البنك bank; blood ad-dam b. بنك الدم bank; Bank World the (daulī) الدولى
 مبنك mubannak stranded
 مبنك محنك muḥannak mubannak shrewd, sly, astute
بنكنوت (Engl.) banknōt banknote
بن  see بنوى and بنوة
بنوار (Fr. baignoire) banwār baignoire, theater box of the lowest tier
 بنى bana i (بناء binā’, بنيان bunyān) and VIII to build, erect, construct, set up (ھ s.th.); to build, establish, rest (ھ على s.th. on); to consummate the marriage (بھا and عليھا with a woman); pass. buniya, ubtuniya to be based, be built, rest (على on)│كلمة بنى على (kalimalan) to give a word an indeclinable ending in (a certain vowel or a vowelless consonant; gram.) V see   بن
بناء binā’ building, construction, erection, setting up; structure (also, e.g., of an organism), setup, make-up; (pl. ابنية abniya) building, structure, edifice│اعادة البناء i‘ādat al-b. reconstruction; الحر البناء (ḥurr) Freemaaonry; على بناء binā’an ‘alā according to, in accordance with, on the basis of, by virtue of, on the strength of; ھذا على بناء accordingly, thus
بنائى binā’ī constructional, building (used attributively); architectural; structural
بنية binya, bunya pl. بنى binan, bunan structure, setup, make-up; binya build, frame, physique, physical constitution│ البنية ضعيف of delicate constitution; صحيح البنية and البنية سليم of sound constitution, healthy; البنية قوي qawīy al-b. husky, sturdy
بناء bannā’ pl. -ūn builder; mason; constructive│ حر بناء(ḥurr) Freemason
بناية bināya pl. -āt building, structure, edifice
بنيان bunyān building, construction, erection, setting up; building, structure, edifice; physique, stature
مبنى mabnan pl. مبان mabānin building, construction, erection, setting up; building, structure. edifice; form; foundation, fundament, basis │ الرأى والمبنى (ra’y) content and form
تبن tabannin see   بن
بان bānin pl. بناة bunāh builder
مبنى mabnīy built, set up. erected; founded, based, resting (على on); fixed, established; indeclinable; ending indeclinably (على in; gram.)
  پنى (Engl.) penny
 بنيو (It. bagno) banyō batb, bathtub
بھت bahita a, bahuta u and pass. buhita (baht) to be astonished, amazed, bewildered, startled, perplexed, flabbergasted, speechless; -- bahita to be or become pale, fade (color); -- bahata a to astonish, amaze, bewilder, startle, stagger, flabbergast (ه s.o.); (بھتان buhtān) to slander, defame (ه s.o.) III to come or descend unexpectedly (ه upon s.o.); to startle, stagger, flabbergast (ه s.o.) IV to surprise, astonish, amaze (ھ s.o.) VII = I
بھت buht and بھتان buhtān slander, false accusation; lie, untruth
بھتة bahta perplexity, amazement, bewilderment, stupefaction
باھت bāhit pale, pallid, faded (color); perplexed, aghast
مبھوت mabhūt perplexed, astonished, amazed, startled, flabbergasted, aghast
بھج bahija a to be glad, he bappy (ب about), he delighted (ب at); -- bahuja u to be beautiful, look wonderful IV to gladden, delight, make happy (ب s.o.) VIII to be glad, be happy (ب about), be delighted (ب at)
بھجة bahja splendor, magnificence, beauty, resplendence; joy, delight│بھجة االنظار delight of the eyes, welcome sight
بھج bahij, بھيج bahīj magnificent, splendid, beautiful; happy, joyous; delightful
مبھجة mabhaja a moment of happiness and joy
مباھج mabāhij joys, delights; pleasures, amusements, diversions; splendid things; splendor, pomp, magnificence
ابتھاج ibtihāj joy, rejoicing, delight (ب at)
مبھج mubhij pleasant, charming, delightful
مبتھج mubtahij happy, glad, delighted
بھدل bahdala to insult (ه s.o.); to treat contemptuously, meanly (ه s.o.); to expose (ه s.o.) to ridicule, make a laughingstock (ه of s.o.) II tabahdala pass. of  I
بھدلة bahdala insult, affront, abuse, outrage; meanness; triteness, insipidity
مبھدل mubahdal maltreated, oppressed, miserable
بھر bahara a (bahr) and IV to glitter, shine; to dazzle, overwhelm (ه s.o., ھ s.o.’s eyes)│ االبصار يبھر شيءa dazzling, overwhelming thing; -- pass. buhira to be out of breath, to pant VII to be dazzled, blinded; to be smitten with blindness; to. be out of breath VIII to flaunt, parade, show off, present in a dazzling light (ب s.th.)
بھر bahr deception, dazzlement (ب by)
بھر buhr difficult respiration, labored breathing
بھر bahra (n. vic.) being dazzled, dazzlement
بھرة buhra middle, center│ بھرة فى ... amidst
ابھر abhar  more brilliant, more magnificent
ابھر abhar  aorta (anat.)
بھار bahār pl. -āt spice
ابتھار ibtihār dazzling display, show (ب of s.th.)
باھر bāhir dazzling, brilliant, splendid
مبھور mabhūr breathless, out of breath, panting
بھرج bahraja (بھرج bahraja) to adorn, deck out, dress up showily; to give a deceptive brightness (ھ to); to glamorize (ھ s.th.); to reject as false (ه a witness); to fake, counterfeit (ھ s.th.) II tabahraja to adorn o.s., spruce o.s. up, dress up; to be fake
بھرج bahraj false, spurious, fake, sham, worthless, bad; counterfeit money; tinsel, frippery, cheap finery; trash, cheap stuff
بھرجة bahraja empty show, hollow pomp
بھرجان bahrajan tinsel, frippery
مبھرج mubahraj showy, tawdry, gaudy, ornate, ostentatious; trashy, rubbishy, cheap, inartistic
بھريز bahrīz (eg.) a soup
بھظ bahaza a (bahz) to oppress weigh down (ه s.o.; a load, work), weigh heavily (ھ on s.o.) IV do.
 باھظ bāhiẓ heavy, oppressive, trying; excessive, exorbitant, enormous; expensive, costly
بھق bahaq a kind of lichen (bot.); herpetic eruption, tetter; vitiligo alba, a mild form of leprosy (med.)
بھل bahala a (bahl) to curse (ه s.o.) V and VI to curse one another VIII to supplicate, pray humbly (to God)
ابھل abhal savin (Juniperus sabina; bot.)
ابتھال ibtihāl supplication, prayer
باھل bāhil pl. بھل buhl, buhhal free, independent
بھلول buhlūl, bahlūl pl. بھاليل bahālīl  buffoon, jester, clown, fool
بھلوان bahlawān pl. -āt, -īya acrobat, tumbler, equilibrist, ropedancer, tightrope walker
بھلوانى bahlawānī acrobatic│حركات بھلوانية (ḥarakāt) acrobatics; antics, capers of a tumbler; بھلوانى طيران (ṯayarān) aerial acrobatics, stunt flying
بھم IV to make obscure, dubious, unintelligible (ھ s.th.) V and X to be obscure, ambiguous, unintelligible (على to s.o.)
بھمة bahma lamb, sheep
بھيم bahīm pl. بھم buhum jet-black
بھيمة bahīma pl. بھائم bahā’im beast, animal, quadruped; pl. livestock, cattle, (large) domestic animals
بھيمى bahīmī animal, bestial, brutish
بھيمية bahīmīya brutishness, bestiality, brutality
ابھام ibhām obscurity; vagueness, ambiguity
ابھام ibhām pl. اباھيم abāhīm  thumb; big toe
باھم bāhim big toe
مبھم mubham obscure, dark, cryptic, doubtful, vague, ambiguous│ مبھم عدد (‘adad) abstract number (math.); O العصب المبھم (‘aṣab) the vagus (anat.); المبھم االسم (ism) the demonstrative pronoun (gram.)
 (بھا (بھو bahā u, bahuwa u and بھى bahiya a ( بھاء bahā’) to be beautiful III to vie, compete (ه ب with s.o. in s.th.); to pride
o.s. (ب on)و be proud (ب of), boast (ب of, ه ب to s.o. of s.th.) VI to compete with one another; to be proud (ب of), pride o.s. (ب on)
بھو bahw pl.  ابھاء abhā’ hall; parlor, drawing room, reception hall
بھى bahīy beautiful, magnificent, splendid; brilliant, radiant, shining
بھاء bahā’ beauty, magnificence, splendor; brilliancy
بھائى bahā’ī Bahai (adj.); (pl. -ūn) an adherent of the Bahai sect, a Bahai
ابھى abhā more splendid, more brilliant
مباھاة mubāhāh and تباه tabāhin pride, vainglory, boastfulness
بك see بھوات 
(باء (بوء bā’a u to come again, return; to come back (ب with s.th.), bring back, yield, bring in (ب s.th.)│بالخيبة باء or بالفشل (ḳaiba, fašal) to fail II to provide accommodations (ل and ه for s.o., ھ at a place), put up (ل or ه s.o., ھ at)│مكانا بوأ (makānan) to take a place, settle down, live or stay at a place IV to provide accommodations (ه for s.o., ھ at a place); to settle down, reside, live (ب at a place) V to settle down (ھ at a place), occupy ( مركزا markazan a place), hold (مقاما maqāman a position)│مكانا تبوأ (makānan) to gain ground, become generally accepted; العرش تبوأ  (‘arš) to ascend the throne; الحكم تبوأ  (ḥukm) to come to power, take over power
بيئة bī’a pl. -āt (usually pronounced bai’a) pl. -āt residence, domicile, seat; situation; surroundings, environment, milieu; home, habitat
مباءة mabā’a place to which s.th. comes; abode, dwelling, habitation
al-‘arš t. تبوء العرش tabawwu’: تبوء
accession to the throne
بوب II to divide into chapters or sections (ھ s.th.); to arrange in groups, arrange systematically, class, classify (ھ s.th.)
باب bāb pl. ابواب abwāb, بيبان bībān door;; gate; opening, gateway; entrance; chapter, section, column, rubric; group, class, category; field, domain (fig.)│الباب
 العالى the Sublime Porte; المندب باب b. al- mandab Bab el Mandeb (strait between SW Arabia and Africa; geogr.); االبواب على near, imminent; جديدا بابا فتح to open up a new way, a new possibility; باب فتح futiḥa bāb ... was (were) begun, ... got under way; الشيء باب قفل (qafala) to put an end to s.th., terminate, close s.th.; الفضل باب من (b. il-faḍl) as a favor; اولى باب من(aulā) with all the more reason, the more so; ھذا فى الباب about this matter, about this; باب من
ان الضرورة (b. iḍ-ḍarūra) it is necessary that ... ; الصدفة باب من ليس ھذا (b. iṣ-ṣudfa) that’s no coincidence; باب من كان or في دخل باب (with foll. genit.) to belong to, fall under; بابه في فريد unique of its kind; طلع  ﷲ باب على to pursue one's livelihood, earn one’s bread 80
بابة bāba pl. -āt kind, sort, class, category
بواب bawwāb pl. -ūn doorman, gatekeeper
بوابة biwāba office of gatekeeper
بوابة bawwāba pl. -āt (large) gate, portal│القنطرة بوابة b. al-qanṯara lock gate
تبويب tabwīb division into chapters, sectioning, classification, systematic arrangement, grouping
مبوب mubawwab arranged in groups, classed, classified
بوبلين boblīn poplin
بوبينة (Fr. bobine) bobīna spool, reel
بيت see بويت
بوتاس بوتاسا، (It. potasa) būtāsā, būtās potash
بوتقة būtaqa (usually pronounced bautaqa) crucible, melting pot│الزمان بوتقة في (zamān) in the melting pot of time
بوجية (Fr. bougie) bužīh pl. -āt spark plug (eg.) (باح (بوح bāḥa u (bauḥ) to become known, be
revealed, be divulged, leak out (secret); to reveal, disclose, divulge (ھ or ب s.th., a secret; الى and ل to s.o.) IV to disclose, reveal (ھ or ب s.th., ل to s.o.); to release, abandon, make public property, declare ownerless (ھ s.th.); to permit, allow, leave (s.th., ل to s.o.); to justify, warrant (ھ s.th.) X to reveal (ھ s.th.); to regard as public property, as ownerless, as fair
game; to deem permissible, lawful (ھ s.th.); to hurt (حرمته ḥurmatahū s.o.’s honor); to take possession (ھ of), appropriate, take as booty (ھ s.th.); to seize, confiscate (ھ s.th.)│دمه استباح (damahū) to proscribe, outlaw s.o.
بوح bauḥ divulgence, disclosure (of a secret); confession
بوح būḥ wide, open space; courtyard; hall
باحة bāḥa pl. -āt wide, open space; open place, square, plaza; courtyard; hall
اباحة ibāḥa divulgence, disclosure (of a secret); permission, authorization; licentiousness
اباحى ibāḥī licentious, unrestrained, uninhibited; anarchist; freethinker
اباحية ibāḥīya freethinking, libertinism; anarchism
استباحة istibāḥa appropriation, capture, seizure; spoliation, confiscation
مباح mubāḥ permitted, allowed, permissible; legal, lawful, licit, legitimate; open to everyone, permitted for all, free; ownerless (1.1. Law); indifferent (said of actions for which neither reward nor punishment is to be expected, but which are permissible, pl. مباحات indifferent, permissible actions, Isl. Law)
(باخ (بوخ bāḳa u to abate, subside, let up, decrease; to die, go out (fire); to fade, bleach; to spoil, rot (e.g., meat) II to spoil (ھ s.th.)
بواخ buwāḳ evaporation, exhalation, vapor, steam
تبويخ tabwīḳ: النكتة تبويخ an-nukta the spoiling of the point of a story
□ بايخ bāyiḳ spoiled, bad; vapid, insipid, stale (also, e.g., of a joke)
بوخارست būḳārest Bucharest
بودرة (Fr. poudre) būdra powder
بودقة būdaqa pl. بوادق bawādiq  crucible, melting pot
بوذا būdā Buddha
بوذى būdī Buddhistic; Buddhist
 بوذية būdīya Buddhism
(بار (بور bāra u (baur, بوار bawār) to perish; to lie fallow, be uncultivated (land); to be futile, unsuccessful, unprofitable, lead to nothing (work); to be unsalable, be dead stock (merchandise)│البنات بارت (bint) the girl could not get a husband II to let lie fallow (ھ land); to make unprofitable, useless (ھ s.th.) IV to destroy
بور būr uncultivated, fallow│ بور ارض (arḍ), pl. بور اراض (arāḍin) fallow land, wasteland
hell دار البوار ruin│ perdition, bawār بوار
بائر bā’ir uncultivated, fallow (land)
بورانى baurānī (eg.) a vegetable stew
سعيد بور būr sa‘īd Port Said (seaport in NE Egypt)
سودان بور būr sūdān Port Sudan (seaport in NE Sudan)
بورتوريكو burturīkū Puerto Rico
بورتغال burtugāl Portugal
بورصة būrṣa pl. -āt stock exhange
فؤاد بور Port Fuad (seaport in NE Egypt, opposite Port Said)
بورق bauraq borax
بورما burma Burma
  بورى (Turk. boru) būrī trumpet, bugle
بوروجى biūjī pl. -īya trumpeter, bugler
  بورى būrī (pl. بوارى bawārī) striped mullet (Mugil cephalus; zool.)
  بوريه (Fr.) būrēh purée
  بوز II to pout, sulk, look glum, sullen
بوز būz pl. ابواز abwāz muzzle, snout
تبويزة tabwīza sullen mien
مبوز mubawwaz sullen, glum
  بوز būz, بوزة bum ice cream
  بوزةbūza a beerlike beverage
falcon bīzān بيزان abwāz, ابواز pl. bāzباز  
 بوس būs bus
 باس ((بوس bāsa u (baus) to kiss (ه s.o.)
بوسة bausa, būsa kiss
بوستو (It. busto) bustū corset
بوستة بوسطة، (It. posta) busṯa, busta post, mail
البوسفور al-busfūr the Bosporus
بوش) باش) bāša u (bauš) to be boisterous, shout, roar (crowd) II do.
mob. )ابواش (for aubāš اوباش pl. bauš بوش rabble
 بوص būṣ (coll.; n. un. ة) reed
بوصة būṣa pl. -āt inch
 بوص būṣ pl. ابواص abwāṣ, linen or silk fabric
بوصلة (It. bussola) bōṣla compass بوطة būṯa crucible, melting pot بوظة būẓa a beerlike beverage
 بوع bū‘ metatarsal bone (anat.)│الكوع يعرف ال البوع من hث wouldn’t know his knee from his elbow (proverbially, of a stupid person)
 باع bā‘ pl. ابواع abwā‘ the span of the outspread arms, fathom; in Eg. today = 4 ḍirā‘ mi‘mārīya = 3 m│ الباع طويل mighty, powerful; capable, able; knowledgeable; generous, liberal; الباع قصير powerless, helpless, impotent, weak, incapable; niggardly, stingy; الباع قصير impotence, weakness; incapability (عن of); والذراع بالباع with might and main
 بوغ II to surprise
 باغة bāga celluloid; tortoise shell
بوغادة būgāda and بوغاضة būgāḍa potash, lye
strait(s); bawāgīiz  بواغيز pl. būgāz بوغاز Dardanelles theبوغاز الدردنيل harbor│
بوفيه (Fr. buffet) būfēh buffet; bar; sideboard
بوق II to blow the trumpet
بوق būq pl. -āt, ابواق abwāq trumpet, bugle; fanfare; horn (of an automobile, of a gramophone); acoustic signaling device; megaphone; mouthpiece, spokesman; duplicity, treachery, betrayal│ الصوت بوق
b. aṣ-ṣaut or الراديو بوق loudspeaker (radio); O رحمى بوق (raḥimi) oviduct, Fallopian tube (anat.)
بواق bawwāq trumpeter, bugler
باقة bāqa bundle; bunch of flowers, nosegay, bouquet
 بائقة bā’iqa pl. بوائق bawā’iq  misfortune, calamity
bawāqīl  بواقيل pl. būqala بوقالة būqāl, بوقال
vessel without handles, mug
بوكسفورد boksəford patrol wagon, paddy wagon, Black Maria
بوكسكاف (Engl.) bokəkāf box calf
 (بال (بول  bāl u (baul) and V to make water, urinate IV to be diuretic X to cause to urinate
مرض البول urine│ abwāl ابوال pl. baul بول diabetes as-sukarī al-b. maraḍ السكرى
بولى baulī uric, urinary, urinous│ المسالك البولية the urinary passages; البولية االمراض diseases of the kidney and urinary bladder; بولى تسمم (tasammum) uremia (med.)
بيلة bīla: O آحانية بيلة (āḥīnīya) albuminuria; O دموية بيلة (damawīya) hematuria (med.)
بوالة bawwāla public lavatory
مبولة mabwala pl. مباول mabāwil  urinal; a diuretic; -- mibwala chamber pot; toilet, water closet
ad-dam ist.  استبوال O istibwāl: استبوال
uremia (med.)
  بال bāl state, condition; heart, mind; notice, regard, attention│بال ذو significant, notable, considerable, important, serious, grave; البال فراغ farāg al-b. leisure; مشغول البال anxious, uneasy, concerned, worried.; البال طويل long-suffering, patient; باله ما ... (with verb) why is it that he (it) ... ?
why ... ? بالك ما how about you? what do you think? باله خال ḳalā bāluhū his mind is at rest, he has no worries; بباله خطر it occurred to him, it came to his mind; اعطى ل) الى باله (جعل القى،)) (a‘ṯā, alqā, ja‘ala) to turn one’s mind to, give one’s attention to, pay attention to, take into account, be mindful of, bear in mind, heed s.th.; يلق لم باال لقولى lam yulqi li-qaulī bālan he didn't pay any attention to what I said; عنه يقل ال باال (yaqillu) no less significant than this
 بول būl postage stamp
 بال bāl whale (zool.)
 بالة look up alphabetically
steel )فوالذ (= būlād بوالد □
بوليسة see بولصة
بوالق būlāq  a district of Cairo
بولندة bōlanda Poland
بولندى bōlandī Polish; (pl. -ūn) Pole
بولو bōlō polo
بولونيا (It. Polonia) būlūniya Poland
بولوني būlūnī Polish; Pole
vice بوليس اآلدابpolice│ būlīs police) (Fr. بوليس  criminal (jinā’ī) البوليس الجنا << squad; military (ḥarbī) البوليس الحربى police; police; secret (sirrī) البوليس السرى police; police traffic بوليس المرور
بوليسية رواية riwāya būlīsīya detective story
 بوليسة and بوليصة (Fr. police) būlīsā, būlīṣa pl. بوالص bawāliṣ , بوالس bawālis  certificate of insurance, policy│الشحن بوليسة b. aš- šaḥn bill of lading
بوليفيا būlīfiyā Bolivia
بوليفى būlīfī Bolivian
uremia al-baulīnā dā’ داء البولينا O
بوم būm (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. ابوام abwām owl  بون baun, būn interval, distance; difference  بان coll.; n. un. ة) ben tree (Moringa; bot.;
horse-radish tree (Moringa oleifera; bot.); Egyptian willow (Salix aegyptiaca L.; bot.)
Aires Buenos  بونسايرس
بونى (Engl.) bōnī pl. بوانى bawānī pony باه bāh coitus; sexual potency; sexuality بوھيميا (Engl.) bōhīmiyā Bohemia
بوھيمي bōhēmī Bohemian (adj. and n.)
بوھيمية bōhēmīya Bohemianism,
Bohemian life
بؤونة ba’ūna the tenth month of the Coptic year
بوية (Turk. boya) bōya paint; shoe polish
بوياجى بويجى، (eg.) boyagī house painter, painter; shoeshine, bootblack
بية bayya = باية look up alphabetically
 بوء see بيئة
بيادة biyāda infantry (Eg.)
بيادى biyādī infantryman, foot soldier
بيانات pl. biyānō biyāna, biyān,  بيان، بيانة، بيانو
biyānāt piano
 بيب bīb pipe, tube; feed pipe, spout (of a reservoir or tank)
 بيبة bība (Western) smoking pipe
(بات (بيت bāta i (مبيت mabīt) to pass or spend the night; to stay overnight; to become; to be (فى in a situation); with foll. imperf.: to get into a situation. Get to the point where; to continue to do s.th., go on or keep doing s.th., stick to s.th. II to brood (by night; ھ about s.th.); to contrive, hatch (ھ an evil plan, ل against s.o.), plot (ل against s.o.); to put up for the night (ه s.o.)│الصف فى بيت (ṣaff; eg.) to flunk, fail promotion (pupil) IV to put up for the night (ه s.o.)
بيت bait pl. بيوت buyūt, بيوتات buyūtāt house, building; tent (of nomads); room; apartment, flat; (garden) bed; family; case, box, covering, sheath; pl. بيوتات large, respectable houses; respectable families; (pl. ابيات abyāt) verse│ االبرة بيت b. al-ibra (navigator’s) compass; البيت اھل ahl al-b. family, specif., the family of the Prophet; البيوتات اھل people from good, respectable families; تجارية بيوتات (tijārīya) commercial houses; الحرام البيت (ḥaram) the Kaaba; بيت الخالء b. al-ḳalā’ and االدب بيت b. al-adab toilet, water closet; الداء بيت origin or seat of the disease; ريفى بيت (rīfī) country house; القصيدة بيت and القصيد بيت (the essential, principal verse of the kasidah, i.e.) the quintessence; the gist, the essential, the hit of s.th.; s.th. that stands out from the rest, the right thing; لحم بيت baitalaḥm  Bethlehem; الملك البيت the ruling house; المال بيت treasure house; fisc, treasury, exchequer (Isl. Law); (Tun.) administration of vacant Muslim states
بيتى baitī domestic, private, home, of the house, house- (in compounds); domesticated (animals); home made
بويت buwait pl. -āt small house; small tent
بيات bayyāt pl. -ūn and بياتة bayyāta boarder (student); (pl. -ūn) pupil of a boarding school (tun.)
بيوت bayyūt stale, old
مبيت mabīt overnight stop, overnight stay; shelter for the night
بائت bā’it stale, old; (eg.) not promoted,
الصف فى (ṣaff) in school
مبيت mubayyit plotter, schemer, intrigant
pajama bījāma بيجامة and bījāmā بيجاما
 (باد (بيد bāda i to perish, die, pass away, become extinct IV to destroy, exterminate, extirpate (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.)
ان بيد baida anna although, whereas; (esp., introducing a sentence:) yet, however, but, ... though
baidawāt بيداوات bīd, بيد pl. baidā’  بيداء
desert, steppe, wilderness
ابادة ibāda annihilation, extermination, eradication, extirpation
بائد bā’id passing, transitory, temporal; past, bygone
مبيد mubīd destructive, annihilative; (pl.
-āt) means of extermination│ حشرية مبيدات
(ḥašarīya) insecticides
  بيادة look up alphabetically
بيدر baidar pl. بيادر bayādir  threshing floor
بيدق baidaq (and بيذق) pl. بيادق bayādiq  pawn (in chess)
alphabetically باذنجان see بيذنجان
 □ بيارة bayyāra pl. -āt (pal.) irrigation wheel; plantation
مصنع البيراbeer│ bīra bīrā, birra) (It. بيرا، بيرة 
maṣna‘ al-b. brewery
بيرق bairaq pl. بايرق bayāriq  flag, banner, standard
بيرقدار bairaqdār color-bearer, standard- bearer
البيرنيه جبال (Fr. Pyrénées) jibāl al-bīrinēh the Pyrenees
 بيرو bērū Peru
 بيرو (Fr. bureau) bīrō pl. -āt office, bureau
بيروت bairūt  Beirut (capital of Lebanon)
 بيارتة bawārita, بوارتة pl. bairūtī بيروتى
bayārita a native or inhabitant of Beirut
بيروقراطى bīruqrāṯī bureaucratic
بيروقراطية bīrūqrāṯīya bureaucracy; red tape
بيزنطيا bīzanṯiyā Byzantium
بيزنطي bīzanṯī Byzantine
بيسون bīsōn bison
(باض (بيض bāḍa i to lay eggs (also ھ); to stay, settle down, be or become resident (ب at a place)│ وفرخ بالمكان باض (wa-farraḳa) to be born and grow up in a place; to establish itself and spread (plague) II to make white, paint white, whitewash, whiten (ھ s.th.); to bleach, blanch (ھ s.th., textiles, laundry, rice, etc.); to tin, tinplate (ھ s.th.); to make a fair copy (ھ of s.th.)│ الوجه بيض(wajhahū) to make s.o. appear blameless, in a favorable light, to whitewash, exculpate, vindicate, justify s.o., play s.o. up, make much of s.o.; to honor s.o., show honor to s.o.; وجھه ﷲ بيض may God make him happy! من يبيض ال صحيفته this doesn't show him in a favorable light V pass. of II; IX to be or become white
بيض baiḍ pl. بيوض buyūḍ eggs
بيضة baiḍa (n. un.) pl. -āt egg; testicle; helmet; main part, substance, essence│ الديك بيضة
b. ad-dīik (the egg of a rooster i.e.) an impossible or extraordinary thing; البلد بيضة
b. al-balad a man held in high esteem in his community; النھار بيضة فى (b. in-nahār) in broad daylight; الصيف بيضة  b. aṣ-ṣaif the hottest part of the summer; االسالم بيضة the territory or pale of Islam; بيضة عن الدفاع الوطن بيضة عن ٥٨ الدين، (b. id-dīn, b. il- waṯan) defense of the faith, of the country; الخدر بيضة b. al-ḳidr a woman seluded from the outside world, a chaste, respectable woman
بيضاوى and baiḍawī بيضوى baiḍī, بيضى
baiḍāwī egg-shaped, oviform, oval, ovate
بييضة buyaiḍa and بويضة buwaiḍa pl. -āt
small egg, ovule; ovum
بياض bayāḍ white, whiteness: whitewash; -- (pl. -āt) barren, desolate, uncultivated land, wasteland: gap, blank space (in a manuscript); blank; leucoma (med.); linen, pl. بياضات linen goods,
linens; (syr.) milk, butter, and eggs│ بياض البيت b. al-bait white of egg, albumen: بياض العين b. al-‘ain the white of the eye: بياض النھار b. an-nahār daylight, (acc.) by day, during the daytime; ليله وسواد يومه بياض bayāḍa yaumihi wa-sawāda lailihi by day and by night: الوجه بياض b. al-wajh tine character, good reputation; بياض سمك samak b. a Nile fish (eg.); بياض على blank, free from writing, printing or marks, uninscribed; (ارتدى or) البياض لبس (labisa, irtada) to dress in white
بيوض bayūḍ pl. بيض buyūḍ, bīḍ (egg-) laying
ابيض abyaḍ , f. بيضاء baiḍā’ , pl. بيض bīḍ white; bright; clean, shiny, polished; blameless, noble, sincere (character); empty, blank (sheet of paper); pl. البيضان al-bīḍān the white race; االبيض white of egg, albumen│ بيضاء ارض (arḍ) barren, uncultivated land, wasteland; بيضاء ثورة (ṯaura) peaceful, bloodless revolution; االبيض الخيط (ḳaiṯ) first light of dawn; الذھب االبيض (dahab) platinum; االبيض بالسالح with cold steel; بيضاء صحيفته (ṣaḥīfatuhū) his reputation is good: he has noble de.ds to his credit, he has a noble character; صحف بيضاء (ṣuḥuf) noble, glorious deeds: اكذوبة بيضاء (ukdūba) white lie, fih: بيضاء ليلة (laila) a sleepless night, a night spent
awake: االبيض الموت (maut) natural death; يد بيضاء (yad) beneficent hand, benefaction
مبيض mabīḍ, mibyaḍ ovary (anat.)
تبييضة tabyīḍa fair copy
O ابيضاض ibyiḍāḍ leukemia (med.)
بائض bā’iḍ pl. بوائض bawā’iḍ  (egg-) laying
مبيض mubayyiḍ pl. -ūn whitewasher; bleacher; tinner; copyist, transcriber (of fair copy)
مبيضة mubayyaḍa fair copy
بيطر baiṯara to practice veterinary science; to shoe (ھ a horse)
bayātira بياطرة pl. baiṯar بيطار
veterinarian; farrier
الطب البيطرىveterinary│ baiṯarī بيطرى طبيب بيطرى medicine; veterinary (ṯibb) veterinarian
 بيطرة baiṯara veterinary science; farriery
 (باع (بيع bā‘a i (bai‘,مبيع mabī‘) to sell (ھ s.th., ه or ل to s.o., ب for a price) III to make a contract (ه with s.o.); to pay homage (ه to s.o.); to acknowledge as sovereign or leader (ه s.o.), pledge allegiance (ه to) IV to offer for sale (ھ s.th.) VI to agree on the terms of a sale, conclude a bargain VII to be sold, be for sale VIII to buy, purchase (ھ من s.th. from s.o. and ه ھ from
s.o. s.th.)│ ابيعه وال منه ابتاع ال (abtā‘u, abī‘uhū) I don't trust him
بيع bai‘ pl. بيوع buyū‘,بيوعات  buyū‘āt sale│للبيع for sale; بيوعات) جبرية or) بيوع (jabrīya) forced sales, compulsory sale by auction: بالجملة بيع (jumla) wholesale sale; بالخيار بيع (ḳiyār) optional sale (Isl. Law); راغب آلخر بيع (li-āḳir rāgibīn) sale to the highest bidder; العينة بيع b. al-‘īna credit operation (Isl. Law)
بيعة bai‘a agreement, arrangement; business deal, commercial transaction, bargain; sale; purchase; homage│البيعة على into the bargain
بياع bayyā‘ salesman, merchant, dealer, commission agent, middleman
مبيع mabī‘ sale, pl. -āt sales (esp. on the stock market)
مبايعة mubāya‘a pl. -āt conclusion of contract; homage; pledge of allegiance; transaction
ابتياع ibtiyā‘ purchase
بائع bā’i‘  pl. باعة bā‘a seller, vendor; dealer, merchant; salesman
بائعة bā’i‘a saleswoman
مبيع mabī‘ and مباع mubā‘ sold
مبتاع mubtā‘ buyer, purchaser
  بيعة bai‘a pl. -āt, بيع biya‘ (Chr.) church; synagogue
بيك bē (eg.), bēg, bēk pl. بيكوات bēgawāt (syr.) bey (title of courtesy); cf. بك
bey of rank bīkawīya بيكوية dividers of) (pair compass, bīkār بيكار بكباشى see بيكباشى
بيكه (Fr.) bīkeh plqué (fabric)
 بيل (Fr. bille) bīl ball│بيل كرسى kursī b. ball bearing
بول see bīla بيلة 
بيلسان bailasān black elder (bot.)
بيلھارسيا bilharsiyā bilharziasis, schistosomiasis
(med.)
بيليه (Fr. bille) bīlya pl. -āt little ball, marble
بيمارستان bīmāristān hospltal; lunatic asylum
 and those who talked; يديه بين (yadaihi) in front of him, before him, in his presence; with him. on him, in his possession, e.g., ال يديه بين سالح (silāḥa) he hasn’t got a weapon on him, he is unarmed; ذلك بين فيما meanwhile, in the meantime; وبين بينى فيما نفسى in my heart, at heart, inwardly; بين ذراعيه in his arms; بينھم من min bainihim from among them, from their midst; بين بين something between, a cross, a mixture, a
بان (
 (بين bāna i (بيان bayān) to be or become plain, evident, come out, come to light; to be clear (ل to s.o.); (بين bain, بينونة bainūna) to part, be separated (من from) II to make clear, plain, visible, evident (ھ s.th.); to announce (ھ s.th.); to state (ھ s.th.); to show, demonstrate (ھ s.th.); to explain, expound, elucidate (ھ s.th.), throw light (ھ on) III to part, go away (ه from), leave (ه s.o.); to differ, be different (ه ھ، from), be unlike s.th. (ھ); to contradict (ھ s.th.), be contrary (ھ to); to conflict, be at variance, be inconsistent (ھ with s.th.) IV to explain, expound, elucidate (ھ ل s.th. to s.o.); to separate, sift, distinguish (ھ من s.th. from); to be clear, plain, evident V to be or become clear, intelligible (ل to s.o.); to turn out, prove in the end, appear, become evident; to follow (من from), be explained (من by); to be clearly distinguished (من from); to seek to ascertain (ھ s.th.), try to get at the mct8 (ھ of); to eye or examine critically, scrutinize (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to look, peer (ھ at); to see through s.th. (ھ), see clearly, perceive, notice, discover, find out (ھ s.th.); to distinguish (ھ من s.th. from) VI to differ, be different, be opposed, be contrary; to vary greatly, differ widely; to vary, differ, fluctuate (بين between two amounts or limits) X to be or become clear, plain, evident; to Bee, know, perceive, notice (ھ s.th.); pass. ustubīna to follow clearly, be clearly seen (من from)
بين bain separation, division; interval; difference│البين ذات enmity, disunion, discord; البين فى meantime, meanwhile
بين baina (prep.) or بين فيما fī-ma b. between; among, amidst│و – بين – either -- or, partly -- partly, e.g., صامت بين القوم كان ومتكلم (ṣāmitin wa-mutakallimin) the crowd was divided among those who were silent
 combination; neither good nor bad, medium, tolerable; بين بين شيء something between, a cross, a mixture, a combination; وآخر وقت بين (waqt, āḳar), بين وأخرى فترة (fatra, uḳrā) at times, from time to time
بين ما mā-baina look up alphabetically
بينا bainā, بينما bainamā (conj.) while; whereas
بين bayyin clear, plain, evident, obvious, patent; (pl. ابنياء abyinā’ ) eloquent
بيان bayān pl. -āt clearness, plainness, patency, obviousness; statement, declaration, announcement; manifestation; explanation, elucidation, illustration; information, news; (official) report. (official) statement; enumeration, index, list; eloquence; البيان the Koran; see also alphabetically│الحقيقة بيان correction (journ.); البيان عن غني (ganīy) self- explanatory, self-evident; البيان علم ‘ilm al-
b. rhetoric; البيان عطف ‘aṯf al-b. explicative apposition (gram.)
بيانى bayānī explanatory, illustrative; rhetorical
بينة bayyina pl. -āt clear proof, indisputable evidence; evidence (Isl. Law); a document serving &8 evidence│ ظرفية بينة (ẓarfīya) circumstantial evidence; بينة على as has been proved; من بينة على كان to be fully aware of; to he well-informed, well-posted, up-to-date about
ابين abyan  clearer, more distinct, more obvious
تبيان tibyān exposition, demonstration, explanation, illustration
تبيين tabyīn and ابانة ibāna exposition, demonstration, explanation, illustration
تباين tabayun difference, unlikeness, dissimilarity, disparity
تباينى tabāyunī different, differing, conflicting
بائن bā’in clear, plain, evident, obvious, patent; final, irrevocable (divorce; Isl.
Law); of great length│الطول بائن b. aṯ-ṯūl
towering, of unusual height (person)
بائنة bā’ina bride’s dowry
مبيونة mabyūna distance
مبين mubīn clear, plain, evident, obvious, patent│المبين الكتاب the Koran
متباين mutabāyin dissimilar, unlike, differential, differing, varying
 بيانة بيان، look up alphabetically
بكباشى see بينباشى بنتو see بينتو
بك = bēh بيه
 بيوريه (Engl.) biyūrē purée
 بيوريه (Fr. pyorrhée) biyōrēh pyorrhea (med.)

ت
 ت abbreviation of تلفون telephone
 ت ta (particle introducing oaths) by, <Iتا ta- llāhi by God!
تاء tā’ name of the letterت
تابوت tābūt pl. توابيت tawābīt  box, case, chest, coffer; casket, coffin, sarcophagus│تابوت العھد t. al-‘ahd ark of the covenant; تابوت المياه رفع t. raf‘ al-miyāh Archimedean screw; الساقية تابوت t. as-āqiya scoop wheel,
Persian wheel
تابيوكا tābiyōkā tapioca
تأتأ ta’ta’a to stammer (with fright)
توج see  تاج وأد see تؤدة
at الى or ه( stare to (baṣara)  اتأر البصر IV  تأر  s.o.)
تور see تارة 
تازة tāza (= طازة) fresh, tender, new
 تاك taka fem. of the demonstrative pronoun ذاك dāka (dual nom. تانك tānika, genit., acc. تينك tainika)
twin tawā’im  توائم pl. ,ة f. tau’am, توأم، توءم
التاميز at-tāmīz the Thames
تاى tay (tun., alg.) tea│احمر تاى black tea
تايور tāyōr and تايير tāyēr (Fr. tailleur) pl. -āt
ladies’ tailored suit, tailleur
تب tabba i (tabb, تبب tabab, تباب tabāb) to perish, be destroyed X to stabilize, be stabilized, be or become stable; to be settled, established, well-ordered, regular, normal; to progress well│االمر له استتب everything went well with him
له تبا tabban lahū may evil befall him! may he perish!
استتباب istitbāb normalcy, regularity, orderliness, order; stability; favorable course or development
التبت at-tibt Tibet
تبر tabara i (tabr) to destroy, annihilate (ھ s.th.)
تبر tibr raw metal; gold dust, gold nuggets; ore
تبار tabār ruin, destruction
تبرية tibrīya dandruff
تبريز tabrīz  Tabriz (city in NW Iran, capital of Azerbaijan province)
تبع tabi‘a a (taba‘,تباعة  tabā‘a) to follow, succeed (ه s.o., ھ s.th.), come after s.o. or s.th. (ه ھ،); to trail, track (ه ھ، s.o., s.th) go after s.o. or s.th. (ه ھ،); to walk behind s.o. (ه); to pursue (ھ s.th.); to keep, adhere, stick (ھ to s.th.), observe (ھ s.th; to follow, take (ھ a road), enter upon (ھ a road or course); to comply (ھ with s.th.); to belong, pertain (ھ to); to be subordinate, be attached (ه to s.o.), be under s.o.’s (ه) authority or command, be under s.o. (الدروس تبع│(ه (durūsa) to attend classes regularly III to follow (ه ھ، s.o. s.th.; also = to keep one's mind or eyes on, e.g., on a development); to agree, concur ( ه with s.o., على in s.th.), be in agreement or conformity (على ھ، with); to pursue, chase, follow up (ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to continue (ھ s.th.; سيره sairahū on one’s
way), go on (ھ with or in) IV to cause to succeed or follow (in time, rank, etc.); to place (ه s.o.) under s.o.’s (ه) authority or command, subordinate (ه ه to s.o. s.o., ھ ھ to s.th. s.th.) V to follow (ھ s.th., esp. fig.: a topic, a development, the news, etc., = to watch, study); to pursue, trail, track (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to trace (ھ s.th.); to be subordinate (ه ھ، to), be attached (ه to s.o.) VI to follow in succession, be successive or consecutive, come or happen successively; to form an uninterrupted sequence VIII to follow, succeed (ه s.o., ھ s.th.), come after (ه ھ،); to make (ھ s.th.) be succeeded or followed (ب by s.th. else); to prosecute (ه s.o.), take legal action (ه against); to follow, obey, heed, observe, bear in mind (ھ s.th.); to pursue (ھ s.th.); to examine, investigate, study (ھ s.th.); pass. uttubi‘a to have or find followers, adherents (على for s.th., e.g., for an idea)│سياسة اتبع (siyāsatan) to pursue a policy; يمينه اتبع (yamīnahū) to keep (to the) right X to make (ه s.o.) follow, ask (ه s.o.) to follow; to seduce (ه s.o.); to have as its consequence, engender, entail (ھ s.th.); to subordinate
to o.s., make subservient to o.s. (ھ s.th.)
تبع taba‘ succession; subordinateness, dependency: following. Followers; subordinate, subservient (ل to s.th.): بالتبع successively, consecutively; ل تبعا taba‘an li according to, in accordance with, pursuant to, in observance of; due to, in consequence of, as the result of; (pl. اتباع atbā‘) follower, companion, adherent, partisan; subject, national, citizen; appertaining, appurtenant, pertinent, incident
تبعى taba‘ī: تبعية عقوبة (‘uqūba) incidental punishment (jur.)
تبعة tabi‘a pl. -āt consequence; responsibility, irresponsibleness│التبعة القى على (alqā) to make s.o. or s.th. responsible
تبيع tabī‘ pl. تباع tibā‘ following attached, attending, adjunct; -- (pl. تبائع tabā’i‘ ) follower, adherent, partisan; aide, help, assistant, attendant, servant
تبعية taba‘īya pl. -āt subordination, subjection; subordinateness, dependency; citizenship, nationality; بالتبعية
 subsequently, afterwards; consequently, hence, therefore, accordingly
تباعا tibā‘an in succession, successively, consecutively, one after the other, one by one
متابعة mutāba‘a following, pursuing, pursuit, prosecution; continuation
اتباع itbā‘ (gram.) intensification by repeating a word with its initial consonant changed, such as katīr batīr
تتبع tatabu‘ following (esp. fig., of an argument, of a development, see V above); pursuit; prosecution; succession, course│التاريخى التتبع the course of history; عدلية تتبعات (‘adlīya) legal action, prosecution
تتابع tatābu‘ sucession; relay (athlet.); بالتتابع consecutively, successively, in succession; serially, in serialized form
اتباع ittibā‘ following; pursuit (e.g., of a policy); adherence (to), compliance (with), observance (of); ل اتباعا ittibā‘an li according to, in accordance or conformity with, pursuant to, in observance of
O اتباعى ittibā‘ī classical
O اتباعية ittibā‘īya classicism
تابع tābi‘ pl. تبعة taba‘a, تباع tubbā‘ following, succeeding, subsequent; subsidiary, dependent; minor, secondary; subordinate (ل to s.o.), under s.o. (ل); belonging (ل to); subject to s.o.’s (ل) authority or competence; adherent (ل to) following (ل s.o. or s.th.); -- (pl. اتباع atbā‘) adherent, follower, partisan; subject, citizen, national; subordinate, servant; factotum; (pl. توابع) appositive (gram.); appendix, addendum, supplement; O function (math.)│ الدول التابعة (duwal) the satellite countries
تابعة tābi‘a pl. توابع tawābi‘  female attendant, woman servant; a female demon who accompanies women; appurtenance, dependency; consequence, effect, result; responsibility; pl. توابع dependencies, dependent territories; O satellites (pol.), = التوابع الدول (duwal) the satellite countries
تابعية tābi‘īya nationality, citizenship
متبوع matbū‘ followed, succeeded (ب by); one to whom service or obedience is rendered, a leader, a principal (as distinguished from تابع subordinate) 90
متتابع mutatābi‘ successive, consecutive
متبع muttaba‘ observed, adhered to, complied with (e.g. regulation, custom); followed, traveled (road,  course)
تبغ tibg pl. تبوغ tubūg tobaooo
تبل tabala i to consume, waste, make sick (ه s.o.; said of love) II, III and توبل taubala to spice, season (ھ s.th)
تابل tābal, tābil pl. توابل tawābil  coriander (bot.); spice, condiment, seasoning
تبولة tabbūla (syr., leb.) a kind of salad made of bulgur, parsley, mint, onion, lemon juice, spices, and oil
متبول matbūl (Iove-)sick, weak, ravaged, consumed
متبل mutabbal spiced, seasoned, flavored; (syr., leb.) stuffed with a mixture of rice, chopped meat and various spices, e.g., متبل بذنجان stuffed eggplant
تبلوه (Fr. tableau) tablōh pl. -āt a painting
تبن tibn straw
تبنى tibnī straw-colored, flaxen
تبان tabbān straw vendor
التابنة درب darb at-tabbāna the Milky Way
متبن matban pl. متابن matābin  straw- stack
تبيوكا tabiyōkā tapioca
 التتر at-tatar and التتار at-tatar the Tatars
تترى tatarī Tatarian; Tatar
تترى tatra (from وتر) one after the other, successively, in succession
تتك titik trigger
تتن tutun tobacco
تتنوس tetanūs tetanus (med.)
تجر tajara u and VIII to trade, do business; to deal (فى or ب in s.th.) III do. (ه with s.o.)
 تجارة tijāra commerce; traffic, trade; merchandise
تجارى tijārī commercial, mercantile, trade, trading, business, (used attributively); commercialized│تجارى بيت (bait) commercial house, business house; التجارية الحركة (ḥaraka) trade, traffic; شركة تجارية (širka) trading company; تجارى اتفاق (ittifāq) trade agreement
متجر matjar pl. متاجر matājir  bussiness, transaction, dealing; merchandise; store, shop
متجرى matjar commercial, trade, trading, business (used attributively)
اتجار ittijār trade, business (ب in s.th)
تاجر tājir pl. تجار tujjār, tijār merchant, trader, businessman, dealer, tradesman│ الجملة تاجرt. al-jumla wholesale dealer; تاجر التجزئة t. at-tajzi’a and القطاعى تاجر t. al- qiṯā‘ī retailer
تاجرة بضاعة biḍā‘a tājira salable, marketable merchandise
تجاه tujāha (prep.) in front of, opposite, face to face with, facing
تحت  taḥta (prep.) under; below, beneath, underneath│ تحت (tajriba) on probation;  in an experimental state; التحضير تحت in preparation; الحفظ تحت (ḥifẓ) in custody, under guard; السداد تحت (sadād), التسديد تحت due, outstanding, unsettled, unpaid (com.); السالح تحت under arms; سمعھم تحت (sam‘ihim) in their hearing, for them to hear; التسوية تحت (taswiya) outstanding, unpaid,  unsettled (com.); اشراف تحت (išrāfi) under the patronage or superintendence of; الشعور تحت subconscious; تصرفه تحت (taṣarrufihī) at his disposal; الطبع تحت (ṯab‘) in press; تحت عنوان (‘unwāni) under the title of; اعيننا تحت (a‘yuninā) before our eyes; التمرين تحت in training; اليد تحت (yad) in hand, at hand, available, handy; يده تحت  in his power; من تحت min taḥt from under, from beneath; under
تحت  taḥtu (adv.) below, beneath, underneath
تحتانى taḥtānī lower, under- (in compounds)│ تحتانية مالبسunderwear
تحف IV to present (ه ب or ه ھ s.o. with s.th)
تحفة tuḥfa pl. تحف tuḥaf gift, present; gem (fig.), curiosity, rarity, article of virtu, objet d'art; work of art│فنية تحفة (fannīya) unique work of art
متحف matḥaf pl. متاحف matāḥif  museum│ الشمع متحف m. aš-šam‘ waxworks
تخ taḳḳa u to become sour, ferment (dough)
  تختpl. tuḳūt bed, couch; bench; seat; sofa; chest, case, box, coffer, cabinet; wardrobe; platform, dais; band, orchestra│ الملك تختt. al-mulk throne; royal residence, capital; المملكة تخت t. al- mamlaka capital (of a country)
تختروان روان، تخت taḳtaruwān, taḳtarawān mule-borne litter
  تختة taḳta board; desk; blackboard
تختخ taḳtaḳa to rot, decay
  تخم taḳima a to suffer from indigestion, feel sick from overeating IV to surfeit, satiate ( ه s.o.) to give (ه s.o.) indigestion, make sick (ه s.o.); to overstuff, cloy (ه the stomach) VIII = I
تخمة tuḳama, tuḳma pl. تخم, -āt indigestion, dyspeptic
متخوم matḳūm suffering from indigestion, dyspeptic
  تخمtaḳama i to fix the limits of (ھ), delimit, limit, confine, bound (ھ s.th.) III to border (ھ on), be adjacent (ھ to s.th.)
تخم taḳm pl. تخوم tuḳūm boundary, border, borderline, limit
متاخم mutāḳm neighboring, adjacent
تدمر tadmur , usually pronounced tudmur  Palmyra (ancient city of Syria, now a small village)
تدمرى tadmurī, usually pronounced tudmurī
anyone│ تدمرى الnobody, not a living soul
ترابيزة (eg.; tarābēza) pl. -āt table تراخوما trāḳōmā trachoma (med.) تراس (Fr. terrasse) terās terrace ترامواى ترام، trām, tramwāy tramway
ترب tariba a to be or become dusty, covered with dust II and IV to cover with dust or earth (ه s.o., ھ s.th.) III to be s.o.’s (ه)
 mate or comrade, be of the same age (ه as s.o.) V to be dusty, be covered with dust
ترب tirb pl. اتراب atrāb person of the same age, contemporary, mate, companion, comrade
ترب tarib dusty, dust-covered
تربة turba pl. ترب turab dust; earth, dirt; ground (also fig.); soil; grave, tomb; graveyard, cemetery, burial ground
تربى turabī pl. -īya (eg.) gravedigger
tirbān تربان atriba, اتربة pl. turāb تراب
dust, earth, dirt; ground, soil
ترابى turābī dusty; dustlike, powdery; earthlike, earthy; dust-colored, gray
O ترابة turāba cement
تريبة tarība pl. ترائب tarā’ib  chest, thorax
متربة matraba poverty, misery, destitution; (pl. متارب matārib ) dirt quarry
مترب mutrib dusty, dust-covered
تربس tarbasa (= دربس) to bolt (ھ a door)
ترابس tarābis , ترابيس pl. tirbās ترباس
tarābis  bolt, l&tch (of a door or window)
تربنتين tarbantīn turpentine تربيزة (eg.) tarabēza table تربين trbīn pl. -āt turbine تراث see وترث
ترتر tirtir gold and silver spangles (eg.)
ترجم tarjama to translate (ھ s.th. عن from one language الى to another); to interpret (ھ s.th.); to treat (ھ of s.th.) by way of explanation, expound (ھ s.th.); to write a biography (ل of s.o., also ه)
ترجم tarjama pl. تراجم tarājim  translation; interpretation; biography (also الحياة ترجمة); introduction, preface, foreword (of a book)│ السبعينية الترجمة (sab‘īnīya) the Septuagint
tarājima, تراجمة pl. turjumān ترجمان
تراجيم tarājim  transla.tor, interpreter
,-:;" mutarjim translator, interpreter; biographer
مترجم على الفلمtranslated│ mutarjam مترجم
(film) synchronized (film)
ترح tariḥa a (taraḥ) and V to grieve, be sad II and IV to grieve, distress (ه s.o.)
ترح taraḥ pl. اتراح atrāḥ grief, distress, sadness
ترزى tarzī pl. ترزية tarzīya (eg.) tailor
ترزية tarziya tailoring
 تراس look up alphabetically
 ترس II to provide with a shield or armor
ترس turs pl. اترس atrās, تروس turūs shield; disk of the sun; -- tirs pl. turūs cogwheel, gear│ التروس صندوق ṣundūq al-
t. gearbox, transmission; الترس سمك samak at-turs turbot (zool.)
مترس matras, mitras pl. متارس matāris  and متراس mitrās, pl. متاريس matārīs  bolt, door latch; rampart, bulwark, barricade; esp. pl. متاريس barricades
ترسانة tarsāna, ترسحانة tarsḳāna arsenal; shipyard, dockyard
ترسكل (Fr. tricycle) tricycle
ترسينة (It. terrazzino) tarasīna balcony
ترع tari‘a a to be or become full (vessel) IV to fill (ھ s.th., esp. a vessel)
ترعة tur‘a pl. ترع tura‘, -āt canal; artificial waterway│ االيراد ترعة t. al-īrād feeder, irrigation canal; التصريف ترعة drainage canal (Eg.); الشريفة الترعة the Residence of the Sultan of Morocco
ترغلة ترغل، turgul, turgulla turtledove
ترف tarija a to live in opulence, in luxury IV to effeminate (ه s.o.); to provide with opulent means, surround with luxury (ه s.o.) V = I
ترف taraf and ترفة turfa luxury, opulence, affluence; effemination
ترف tarif opulent, sumptuous, luxurious
مترف mutraf living in ease and luxury; sumptuous, luxurious; luxuriously adorned, ornate, overdecorated (ب with)
ترفاس tirfās (magr.) truffle (bot.)
ترفل tarfala to strut
ترقوة tarquwa pl. تراق tarāqin collarbone, clavicle (anat.)
  ترك taraka u (tark) to let be, leave, relinquish, renounce, give up, forswear (ھ s.th.); to desist, refrain, abstain (ھ from s.th.); to leave, quit (ه s.o., ھ a place); to leave out, omit, drop, neglect, pass over, skip (ھ s.th.); to leave (ل or ھ الى s.th. to); to leave behind, leave, bequeath, make over (ھ s.th., ل to s.o.; as a legacy)│ 93 يفعل تركه to let s.o. do s.th.; الى مكانا ترك to leave one place for (another); ذمته في تركه (fī dimmatihī) to leave s.th. in s.o.’s care, leave s.th. to s.o.; حاله على تركه to leave s.th. or s.o. unchanged, leave s.th. or s.o. alone; وشأنه تركه (wa-ša’nahū) to leave s.o. alone, leave s.o. to his own devices III to leave (ه s.o.); to leave alone (ه s.o.); to leave off hostilities (ه against s.o.)
ترك tark omission, neglect; relinquishment, abandonment; leaving, leaving behind
تركة tarika pl. -āt (also tirka) heritage, legacy, bequest
تريكة tarīka pl. ترائك tarā’ik  old maid, spinster
متارك mutāraka truce
متروك matrūk pl. -āt heritage, legacy
 ترك II to Turkify, Turkicize (ه s.o.) X to become a Turk, become Turkified, adopt Turkish manners and customs
الترك at-turk and االتراك al-atrāk the Turks
تركى turkī Turkish; Turk; التركية at- turkīya theTurkish language
تركيا turkiya Turkey
تتريك tatrīk Turkification تركستان turkistān  Turkstan التركمان at-turkumān the Turkmen
ترمبيط turumbēt (syr.) pl. -āt (Western) drum; ترمبيطة turumbīṯa (eg.) pl. -āt do.; specif., bass drum
ترمبطجى turumbaṯgi (eg.) drummer; bandsman (mil.)
ترمس turmus, ترموس turmūs lupine (bot.)
ترمومتر termūmitr thermometer
اترج، اترنج see turunj ترنج
تره tariha a to concern o.s. with trifles
ترھة turraha pl. -āt sham, mockery, farce; lie, humbug, hoax
ترواده (Fr. Troade) tirwāda Troy
تروب (Engl. troop) squad, platoon; squadron│ سوارى تروب (sawārī) cavalry squadron (Eg.)
above ترمبيط under see ترمبيتجى = ترمبطجى
ترياق tiryāq theriaca; antidote
تريكو (Fr.) tricot
تسعة tis‘a (f. تسع tis‘) nine
عشر تسعة tis‘ata ‘ašara, f. عشرة تسع  tis‘a ‘ašrata nineteen
تسع tus‘ pl. اتساع atsā‘ one ninth, the ninth part
تسعون tis‘ūn ninety
التاسع at-tāsi‘ the ninth
تشرين الثانى October, al-wwal tišrīn  تشرين االول
t. at-tānī November (Syr., Ir., Leb., Jord.) تشيكوسلوفاكيا tšekoslovākiyā Czechoslovakia تشيلى tšīlī Chile
تطوان tiṯwān   Tetuēn (city in N Morocco)
علو see ,تعالى of abbreviation تع
تعب ta‘iba a (ta‘ab) to work hard, toil, slave, drudge, wear o.s. out; to be or become tired, weary (من of s.th.) IV to trouble, inconvenience (ه s.o.); to irk, bother, weary, tire, fatigue (ه s.o.)
تعب ta‘ab pl. اتعاب at‘āb trouble, exertion, labor, toil, drudgery; burden, nuisance, inconvenience, discomfort, difficulty, hardship; tiredness, weariness, fatigue; pl. اتعاب fees, honorarium
تعب ta‘ib and تعبان ta‘bān tired, weary, exhausted 94
متاعب matā‘ib  troubles, pains, efforts; discomforts, inconveniences, difficulties, troubles; complaints, ailments, ills (attending disease); hardships, strains
متعب mut‘ib troublesome, inconvenient, toilsome, laborious; burdensome, irksome, annoying; wearisome, tiresome, tiring; tedious, dull, boring
متعب mut‘ab tired, weary
 تعتع ta‘ta‘a to stammer; to shake (ه s.o.); اتعتع
itta‘ta‘a to move, stir
تعز ta‘izz  Taizz (city in S Yemen, seat of government)
تعس ta‘asa a, ta‘isa a to fall, perish; to become wretched, miserable; ta‘asa and IV to make unhappy or miserable, ruin (s.o.)
تعس ta‘s and تعاسة ta‘āsa wretchedness, misery
تعس ta‘is and تعيس ta‘īs pl. تعساء tu‘asā’ wretched, miserable, unfortunate, unhappy
matā‘is متاعيس pl. mat‘ūs متعوس
wretched, miserable, unfortunate, unhappy
تف taffa to spit II to say "phew"
تف tuff dirt under the fingernails; لك تفا
tuffan laka phew! fie on you!
O تفافة taffāfa spittoon, cuspidor
taffeta تفتاه tafettā, تفتا
تفاح tuffaḥ (call.; n. un. ة) apple(s) تفكة tufka pl. تفك tufak (ir.) gun, rifle تفل tafala u i (tafl) to spit
تفل tufl and تفال tufāl spit, spittle, saliva
تافل tāfil ill-smelling, malodorous
متفلة mitfala spittoon, cuspidor
تفه tafiha a (tafah, تفاھة tafāha, تفوه tufūh) to be little, paltry, insignificant; to be flat, tasteless, vapid, insipid
تفه tafah and تفه tufūh paltriness, triviality, insignificance
تفاھة tafāha paltrineBB, triviality, insignificance flatness, vapidity, insipidity, tastelessness; inanity, stupidity, silliness
تفه tafih and تافه tāfih little, paltry, trivial, trifling, insignificant; worthless; commonplace, common, mediocre; flat, tasteless, vapid, insipid; trite, banal
تافھة tāfiha pl. توافه tawāfih  worthless thing; triviality, trifle
قوى see تقاوى قلى see تقلية
تقن IV to perfect, bring to perfection (ھ s.th; to master, know well (ھ s.th., e.g., a language), be proficient, skillful, well- versed (ھ in s.th.)
تقن tiqn skillful, adroit
تقانة taqāna firmness, solidity; perfection اتقن atqan  more perfect, more thorough اتقان itqān perfection; thoroughness,
exactitude, precision; thorough skill, proficiency; mastery, command (e.g., of a special field, of a language)│ االتقان غاية فى to greatest perfection; of excellent workmanship
متقن mutqan perfect; exact, precise
تقى taqā i to fear (esp. God) VIII see وقى
تقى taqīy pl. اتقياء atqiyā’  God-fearing, godly, devout, pious
اتقى atqā more pious
تقى tuqan and تقوى taqwā godliness, devoutness, piety
  تكtakka u to trample down, trample underfoot, crush (ھ s.th.); to intoxicate (ه s.o.; wine)
  تكtikka pl. تكك tikak waistband (in the upper seam of the trousers) 95
  تك takka to tick (clock)
تكة tikka pl. -āt ticking, ticktock (of a clock), ticking noise
  تكية look up alphabetically
تكوت tukūt pl. of Engl. ticket
  تكتك taktaka to trample down, trample underfoot (ھ s.th)
  تكتك taktaka to bubble, simmer (boiling mass)
  تكتك taktaka to tick (clock)
تكتكة taktaka ticking, ticktock (of a clock), ticking noise
  تكتيك taktīk tactics
تكيةtakīya pl. تكايا takāyā monastery (of a Muslim order); hospice; home, asylum (for the invalided or needy)
  تل tall pl. تالل tilāl, اتالل atlāl, تلول tulūl hill, elevation│ ابيب تلt. abīb Tel Aviv (city in W Israel)
   تل tull tulle
تالتل talātil  hardships, troubles, adversities
تليد talīd, تالد tālid, تالد tilād inherited, time- honored, old (possession, property)
تلسكوب tiliskūb telescope
تلع IV to stretch one's neck; to crane (ھ the neck)
تلعة tal‘a pl. تالع tilā‘ hill, hillside, mountainside; (torrential) stream
تليع talī‘ long, outstretched, extended; high, tall
تلغراف tiligrāf, taligrāf pl. -āt telegraph; telegram, wire, cable│الى تلغرافا ارسل to send a wire to
تلغرافى tiligrāfī, taligrāfī telegraphic
تلف talafa a (talaf) to be annihilated, be destroyed; to be or become damaged or spoiled, be ruined, break, get broken, go to pieces II to ruin (ھ s.th.); to wear out, “finish” (ه s.o.) IV to destroy, annihilate ( ھ s.th.); to ruin, damage, spoil, break (ھ s.th.); to waste (ھ s.th.)
تلف talaf ruin, destruction; ruination, damage, injury, harm.; loss; waste
تلفان talfān spoiled; useless, worthless, good-for-nothing
متالف pl. matlafa متلفة matlaf, متلف
matālif  desert
متالف mitlāl wastrel; ruinous, harmful, injurious
اتالف itlāf pl. -āt annihilation, destruction; damage, injury, harm
تالف tālif ruined, damaged, broken; spoiled, bad
متلوف matlūf and متلف mutlaf ruined, damaged, broken; spoiled, bad
متلف mutlif annihilator, destroyer; injurer; damaging, ruinous, harmful, injurious, noxious
تلفز talfaza to televise, transmit by television
تلفزة talfaza television
تلفازية اذاعة iḍāfa talfāẓīya television broadcast, telecast
O تلفاز tilfāz television set
تلفزيون (Fr. télévision) tilivisyōn television
تلفن talfana to telephone
تلفون tilifūn and تليفون talīfūn pl. –āt telephone
لقى see تلقاء
تلك tilka fem. of the demonstrative pronoun ذلك تلم talam pl. اتالم atlām (plow) furrow
تلمذ talmada to take on as, or have for, a pupil or apprentice (ه s.o.); to be or become a pupil or apprentice (ل of s.o., 96 also على), receive one’s schooling or training (على from) II tatalmada to be or become a pupil or apprentice (ل or  يده على  of s.o.), work as an apprentice (ل or يده على under s.o.)
تلمذة talmada school days, college years; apprenticeship; (time of) probation
تلماذ tilmād learning, erudition
تلميذ tilmīd pl. تالميذ talāmīd , تالمذة talamida pupil, student, apprentice; probationer; trainee; disciple│ بحرى تلميذ (baḥrī) approx.: chief warrant W-3 (naval rank; Eg.); سفرى تلميذ (safarī) approx.: chief warrant W-4 (naval rank; Eg.)
تلميذة tilmīda pl. –āt girl student
تلمسان tilimsān  Tlemcen (city in NW Algeria)
تلمود talmūd Talmud
تله taliha a (talah) to be astonished, amazed, perplexed, at a loss
تاله tālih and متله mutallah at a loss, bewildered, perplexed│العقل تاله t. al-‘aql absent-minded, distracted
(تلو) تال) talā u (تلو tulūw) to follow, succeed; to ensue; -- (تالوة tilāwa) to read, read out loud (ھ s.th., على to s.o..); to recite (ھ s.th.) VI to follow one another, be successive
تلو tilwa (prep.) after, upon│تلو كتابا ارسل كتاب to send letter after letter
تالوة tilāwa reading; public reading; recital, recitation
تال tālin following, succeeding, subsequent, next; بالتالى bi-t-tālī then, later, subsequently; consequently, hence, therefore, accordingly
متتال mutatālin successive, consecutive
 تلى tallī (tun.) tulle
تليباثى tilībātī telepathy; telepathic
تليس tallīs, tillis pl. تالليس talālīs  sack تليفزيون (Fr. télévision) tilīvisyōn television تليفون pl. –āt talīfūn telephone
تليفونى talifūnī telephonic, telephone- in compounds)
تم tamma i to be or beoome complete, completed, finished, done; to be performed, be accomplished (ل by s.o..); to come to an end, be or become terminated; to come about, be brought about, be effected, be achieved, come to pass, come off, happen, take place, be or become a fact; to be on hand, be there, present itself; to persist (على in); to continue (على s.th. or to do s.th.) II and IV to complete, finish, wind up, conclude, terminate (ھ s.th.); to make complete, supplement, round out, fill up (ھ s.th.); to carry out, execute, perform, accomplish, achieve (ھ s.th.) X to be complete, completed, finished
تمام tamām completeness, wholeness, entirety, perfection; full, whole, entire, complete, perfect; separate, independent; تماما tamāman completely, entirely, wholly, perfectly, fully, quite; precisely, exactly│ تمام بدر(badr) and تمام قمر (qamar) full moon; السادسة الساعة تمام فى at 6 o'clock sharp; الكلمة معنى بتمام (ma‘nā l-kalima) in the full sense of the word; بالتمام entirely, completely
تميمة tamīma pl. تمائم tamā’im  amulet
اتم atamm  more complete, more perfect
تتمة tatimma completion; supplementation; supplement
تتميم tatmīm completion; perfection; consummation, execution, fulfillment, realization, effectuation, accomplishment
اتمام itmām completion; perfection; termination, conclusion; consummation, execution, fulfillment, realization, effectuation, accomplishment 97
استتمام istitmām termination, conclusion
تام tāmm complete, perfect, entire, consummate; of full value, sterling, genuine
تمباك tumbāk Persian tobacco (esp. for the narghile)
تمتم tamtama to stammer, mumble, mutter; to recite under one's breath (ب s.th)
تمر tamr (coll.; n. un. ة, pl. tamarat, تمور tumūr) dates, esp. dried ones│ ھندى تمر (hindī) tamarind (bot.)
-ya pl. تمورجى، تومرجى tamargī), (eg. تمرجى pl.  تمرجية attendant; hospital nurse, male
-āt female nurse
تموز look up alphabetically
تمساح timsāḥ pl. تماسيح tamāsīḥ  crocodile
ورق تمغةmark│ stamp stamp; tamga تمغة
waraq t. stamped paper
تمن tumman rice
تموز tammūz  July (Syr., Ir., Leb., Jord.)
  تن tunn tuna (zool.)
  تينن tinnīn pl. تنانين tanānīn  sea monster; Draco (astro.); waterspout (meteor.), see also alphabetically
تانئ tāni’ pl. تناء tunnā’ resident
تنباك tunbāk (pronounced tumbāk) and تنبك tumbak Persian tobacco (esp. for the narghile)
تنبال tinbāl pl. تنابيل tanābīl  short, of small Stature
تنبر (Fr. timbre) tambar pl. تنابر tanābir  stamp (magr.)
متنبر mutambar stamped (magr.)
تنبل (Turk. tembel) tambal pl. تنابلة tanābila
lazy
تنجستين (Fr. tungstène) tongəstēn tungsten
تندة (It. tenda) tanda awning, roofing, sun roof
تنور tannūr pl. تنانير tanānīr  a kind of baking oven, a pit, usually clay-lined, for baking bread
تنورة tannūra (syr., leb.) (lady's) skirt
تنس tennis
  تنك tanak tin plate
تنكجى tanakjī tinsmith, whitesmith
 تنكة tanaka pl. -āt tin container, can, pot, jerry can
  تانك tānika see تاك alphabetically
tennis تنيس
تنين tannīn tannin, tannic acid
تھته tahtaha to stammer, stutter
  تھمةtuhma pl. تھم tuham accusation, charge; suspicion; insinuation
 تھامة tihāma  Tihama, coastal plain along the southwestern and southern shores of the Arabian Peninsula
توا tawwan right away, at once, immediately; just (now), this very minute│ للتوli-t-tawwi at once, right away, also with pers. suffix.: لتوى li-tawwī, لتوھا li-tawwihā (I have, she has) just ... ; at once, presently, immediately
تواليت (Fr. toilette) tuwālēt toilette
تأم see توأم
(تاب (توب tāba u (توب taub, توبة tauba, متاب matāb) to repent, be penitent, do penance, with عن: to turn from (sin), be converted from, renounce, forswear s.th.; (said of God) to restore to His grace, forgive (على s.o.)│ﷲ الى تاب to turn to God in repentance II to induce to repentance or penitence, make repent (ه s.o.) X to call on
s.o. (ه) to repent
توبة tauba repentance, penitence, contrition; penance 98
تواب tawwāb doing penance; repentant, penitent, contrite; forgiving, merciful (God)
تائب tā’ib repentant, penitent, contrite
تبل see توبل
توبوغرافيا tobogrāfiyā topography
  توت tūt mulberry tree; mulberry│ارضى توت (ardī) and افرنجى توت  (ifranjī) strawberry; شوكى توت (šaukī) and العليق توت t. al-‘ullaiq raspberry
  توت tūt the first month of the Coptic calendar
zinc توتية tūtiyā’, توتياء tūtiyā, توتيا
توج II to crown (ه s.o.; also fig. ھ ب s.th. with) V to be crowned
تاج pl. تيجان tījān crown; miter (of a bishop)│العمود تاج t. al-‘amūd capital of a column or pilaster); الكرة تاج t. al-kura calotte
تويج tuwaij little crown, coronet
تتويج tatwīj crowning, coronation
توجو tōgo and توجولند tōgōland (Eg. spelling) Togo (region in W Africa)
تيح see توح( تاح(
تارة tāratan once; sometimes, at times│– تارة طورا – تارة تارة، (ṯauran), اخرى – تارة (uḳrā) sometimes – sometimes, at times – at other times
توراة taurāh Torah, Pentateuch; Old Testament
توربيد تورپيد، turpīd, turbīd torpedo (sub-marine missile)
توربين turbīn pl. -āt turbine
تورتة torta pl. -āt pie, tart
(تاق (توق tāqa u (tauq, توقان tawaqān) to long., yearn, wish (الى for), hanker (الى after), desire, crave, covet (الى s.th.), strive (الى for), aspire (الى to)
توق tauq, توقان tawaqān longing, yearning, craving, desire
تواق tawwāq longing, yearning, eager (
الى for), craving (الى s.th)
تائق tā’iq longing, yearning, eager (الى for), craving (الى s.th)
امامية توكة (tōka amāmīya; eg.) belt buckle (mil.)
تول tūl tulle
تمرجى see تومرجى
تون tūn and تونة tūna (zool.) تونج (Turk. tunç) tunj bronze تونسtūnus  Tunis
تونسى tūnisīy pl. توانسة tawānisa Tunisian (adj. and n.)
تونية tūniya pl. توانى alb of priests and deacons (Chr.)
(تاه (توه tāha u and II = (تاه (تيه tāha i and II
توھة tūha daughter
تياترو (It. teatro) tiyātrō theater
 ثيتل see تياتل pl. taital تيتل □ (med.) tetanus tītānūs تيتنوس
(تاح (تيح tāḥa i to be destined, be foreordained (by fate, by God; ل to s.o.); to be granted, be given (ل to s.o.) IV to destine, foreordain (ل ھ to s.o. s.th.); to grant, afford, offer (ل ھ s.o. s.th.); pass. utīḥa to be destined, be foreordained, be granted, be given (ل to s.o.)│التوفيق له اتيح (utīḥa) he met with success, he was successful; له اتيح الفرصة (furṣa) he was given the opportunity, he had the chance .
تيار tayyār pl. -āt flow, stream, course, current, flood; fall (of a stream); movement, tendency, trend; draft (of air); (el.) current│O مباشر تيار (mubāšir) and تيار مستمر mustamirr) direct current; O تيار متناوب (mutanāwib) and O متغير تيار (mutagayyir) alternating current; O تيار متذبذب  mutadabdib) oscillating current (el.); O نابض يار (nābiḍ) pulaoting current; 99 O التردد سريع يار (sarī‘ at-taraddud) high-frequency current; O التردد تياربطيء (baṯī’ at-taraddud) low-frequency current; O الجھد عالى تيار (‘ālī l-jahd) heigh-tension current; O الجھد واطئ تيار (wāṯI’ al-jahd) low-tension current; O ذاتى تيار (dātī) self- induced current
O متار matār (Byr.) dynamo, generator
تيزة (Turk. teyze) tēza maternal aunt
تيس tais pl. اتياس atyās, تيوس tuyūs billy goat
اتيس atyās  foolish, crazy
التيفودية الحمى al-hummā t-tīfūdīya typhoid fever
تيفوس tīfūs typhus
تيك tīka fem. of the demonstrative pronoun ذاك
dāka
 تيل II (from Turk. tel) to cable, wire, telegraph
(syr.)
 تيل tīl hemp; linen
 تيلة tīla fiber, staple
 (تام (تيم tāma I (taim) to become enslaved, enthralled by love; to enslave, make blindly subservient (ه s.o.; through love) II to enslave, enthrall (love; ه s.o.); to make
blindly subservient, drive out of his mind, infatuate (ه s.o.; love)
متيم mutayyam enslaved, enthralled (by love), infatuated
  تيماء taimā’ Taima (oasis in NW Arabia)
تمرجى  see تيمارجى
تين tīn (coll.; n. un. ة) fig │شوكي تين (šaukī) fruit of the Indian fig (Opuntia ficusindica Haw.)
تينك tainika see تاك alphabetically
(تاه (تيه tāha i to get lost, wander about, 1ose one's way, go astray; to stray, wander (thoughts); to escape (من s.o.), slip (من s.o.’s memory); to perish, be destroyed, be lost; to be perplexed, startled, astonished; to be haughty; to swagger, boast, brag (على to s.o.)│ابتسامة وجھه على تتيه  asmile flits over his face II to mislead, lead astray (ه s.o.); to distract, divert (ه s.o.); to confuse, confound, bewilder (ه s.o.) IV = II
تيه tīh desert, trackless wilderness; maze, labyrinth; haughtiness, pride
تياه tayyāh straying, stray, wandering; haughty
تيھان taihān  straying, stray, wandering; perplexed, at a loss, bewildered; proud, hughty
تيھاء taihā’  and matāha a trackless, desolate region; متاھة maze, labyrinth
تائه tā’ih straying, stray, wandering, roving, errant; lost in thought, distracted, absent-minded; lost, forlorn; infinite; haughty
تيوليب (Engl.) tulip

ث
ث abbreviation of ثانية second (time unit)
ثاء tā’ name of the letter ث
ثئب ta’iba a (ثأب ta’b) and VI to yawn
ثؤباء tu’abā’ yawning, yawn; fatigue, weariness
ثأر ta’ara a (ta’r) to avenge the blood of (ه or ب), take blood revenge (ه for 100 s.o. killed), take vengeance, avenge o.s. (ه ب on s.o. for, also من or ل for) IV and VIII
 اثأر itta’ara to get one’s revenge, be avenged
ثأر ta’r pl. -āt أثآر at’ār, آثار ātār revenge, vengeance, blood revenge; retaliation, reprisal│ثأره أخذ or بالثأر أخذ to take  revenge, avenge o.s.; الثأر مباراة mubārāt
at-t. return match (sports)
ثائر tā’ir avenger
ta’ālīl  ثآليل pl. tu’lūla ثؤلولة and tu’lūl ثؤلول
wart
ثأى ta’ā scars
ثبت tabata u (ثبات tabāt, ثبوت tubūt) to stand firm, be fixed, stationary, immovable, unshakable, firm, strong, stable; to hold out, hold one's ground (ل against s.o. or s.th.), be firm, remain firm (ل toward s.o. or s.th.), withstand, resist, defy (ل s.o. or s.th.); to be established, be proven (fact); to remain, stay (ب at a place); to maintain (على s.th.), keep, stick, adhere (على to s.th.), abide or stand by s.th. (على; e.g., by an agreement); to insist (على on)│ فى ثبت وجھه (fī wajhihī) to hold one’s own against s.o., assert o.s. against s.o. II to fasten, make fast, fix (ھ s.th.); to consolidate, strengthen (ھ s.th.); to stabilize (ھ s.th.); to confirm, corroborate, substantiate (ھ s.th.); to appoint permanently (. s.o.; to an office); to prove, establish (ھ s.th.), demonstrate, show (بان that); to prove guilty, convict (على a defendant); to confirm (Chr.)│ به بصره ثبت(baṣarahu) to fix one’s eyes on, gaze at; قدميه ثبت (qadamaihi) to gain a foothold IV to establish, determine (ھ s.th.); to assert as valid or authentic, affirm (ھ s.th.); to confirm, corroborate, substantiate (ھ s.th.); to prove (ھ على s.th. to s.o.; ل to s.o., ان that); to demonstrate, show (ھ s.th.); to furnish competent evidence (ھ for); to bear witness, attest (ھ to); to acknowledge (ھ s.th., e.g., a qualification, a quality, ل in s.o.), concede (ھ ل s.th. to s.o.); to prove guilty, convict (على a defendant); to enter, record, register, list ( ھ فى s.th. in a book, in a rooter, etc.)│ اثبته الورق فى (waraq) to put s.th. down in writing, get s.th. on paper; الشخص اثبت (šaḳṣa) to determine s.o.’s identity, identify s.o.; شخصيته اثبت (šaḳṣīyatahū) to identify o.s., prove one’s identity V to
ascertain, verify (فى s.th., ھل if), make sure (فى of s.th., ھل if); to consider carefully (فى s.th.), proceed with caution (فى in) X to show o.s. stead-fast, persevering; to seek to verify (ھ s.th.), try to make sure (ھ of), seek confirmation of or reassurance with regard to (ھ); to ascertain, verify (ھ s.th.), make sure (ھ of s.th.); to find right, proven or true, see confirmed (ھ s.th.); to regard as authentic (ھ s.th.)
ثبت tabt firm, fixed, established; steadfast, unflinching; brave
ثبت tabat reliable, trustworthy, credible ثبت tabat pl. اثبات atbāt list, index, roster ثبات tabāt firmness; steadiness,
 
constancy, permanence, stability; certainty, sureness; perseverance, persistence, endurance; continuance, maintenance, retention (على of s.th.), adherence (على to)
ثبوت tubūt constancy, immutability, steadiness; permanence, durability; certainty, sureness│ الشھر ثبوتt. aš-šahr the official determination of the beginning of a lunar month
اثبت atbat more reliable, firmer, steadier, etc.
تثبيت tatbīt consolidation, strengthening; stabilization; confirmation; corroboration, substantiation│ التثبيت سر sirr at-t. the Sacrament of Confirmation (Chr.)
اثبات itbāt establishment; assertion; confirmation; affirmation, attestation; demonstration; proof, evidence; 101 registration, entering, listing, recording; documentation, authentication, verification│ اثبات شاھد witness for the prosecution; االثبات عبء ‘ib’ al-i. burden of proof (jur.)
اثباتى itbātī affirmative, confirmatory, corroborative, positive
تثبت tatabbut ascertainment; verification, examination, check; careful, cautious procedure, circumspection; interment (of the remains of a saint; Chr.)
ثابت tābit firm, fixed, established; stationary, immovable; steady, invariable, constant, stable; permanent, lasting, durable, enduring; confirmed, proven; a
 constant│ الجأش ثابت t. al-ja’š undismayed, fearless, staunch, steadfast; العزم ثابت t.
al-‘azm firmly resolved, determined; امالك ثابتة and ثابتة أموال immovable property, real estate, realty; O االتجاه ثابت t. al-ittijāh unidirectional, rectified (el.)
ثابتة tābita pl. ثوابت tawābit  fixed star
مثبوت matbūt established, confirmed; certain, sure, positive, assured; proven
ثبر tabara u to destroy, ruin (ه s.o.); (ثبور tubūr) to perish III to apply o.s. with zeal and perseverance (على to s.th.), persevere, persist (على in)
ثبور tubūr ruin, destruction│بالويل نادى دعا) والثبور or) nādā (da‘ā) bi-l-wail wa-t-t. to wail, burst into loud laments
مثابرة mutābara persistence, perseverance, endurance; diligence, assiduity
ثبط tabaṯa u and II to hold back, keep, prevent (ه عن s.o. from doing s.th.); to hinder, handicap, impede, slow down, set back ( ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to bring about the failure ( ھ of s.th.), frustrate (ھ s.th.)
ثبنة tubna pl. ثبن tuban lap, fold of a garment (used as a receptacle)
ثبان tibān = ثبنة tubna ثيتل look up alphabetically ثج tajja u to flow coplously
ثجاج tajjāj coplously flowing, streaming
ثخن taḳuna u to be or become thick, thicken; to be firm, solid, compact IV to wear out, exhaust, weaken (ه s.o.)│ضربا اثخنه (ḍarban) to wallop s.o., give s.o. a sound thrashing; العدو فى اثخن (‘aduw) to massacre the enemy; بالجراح اثخنه to weaken s.o. by inflicting wounds
ثخن tiḳan, ثخانة taḳāna, ثخونة tuḳūna thickness, density; consistency; compactness
ثخين taḳīn pl. ثخناء tuḳanā’  thick; dense
ثدى tady and tadyan m. and f., pl. اثداء atdā’
female breast; udder
ثر tarr abounding in water│ الدمع من ثرة (dam‘)
tear-wet, tear-blurred (eye)
ثرب taraba i (tarb) and II to blame, censure (ه and على s.o.)
تثريب tatrīb blame, censure, reproof
ثرثر tartara (ثرثرة tartara) to chatter, prattle
ثرثار tartār  prattler, chatterbox; ثرثارة
tartāra do. (fem.)
ثرثرة tartara chatter, prattle
ثرد tarada u to crumble and sop (ھ bread)
ثريد jarid a dish of sopped bread, meat and broth
مثرد mitrad bowl
ثرم tarama i (tarm) to knock s.o.’o (ه) tooth out; -- tarima a (taram) to have a gap between two teeth
(ثرو and ثرى (ثرى tariya a to become wealthy IV to become or be rich, wealthy (ب or من through s.th.); to make rich, enrich (ه s.o.) 102
ثرى taran moist earth; ground, soil│اين الثريا من الثرى aina t-t. min t-turayyā (proverbially of things of disproportionate value) what has the ground to do with the Pleiades? ثراه ﷲ طيب (ṯayyaba) approx.: may God rest him in peace!
ثرى tarīy pl. اثرياء atriyā’  wealthy, rich│الحرب ثرى t. al-ilarb war profiteer, nouveau riche
ثريtarīyāt plantations
ثروة tarwa and ثروة tarā’ fortune, wealth, riches│الثروة اھل ahl at-t. the rich, the wealthy; قومية ثروة (qaumīya) national wealth; مائية ثروة (mā’īya) abundance of water, abundant supply of water (of a region)
ثريات pl. )ثرية (also Pleiades; turayyā ثريا
turayyāt chandelier
مثر mutr wealthy, rich
t. ثعبان الماء snake│ ta‘ābīn ثعابين pl. tu‘bān ثعبان eel al-mā’
ثعبانى tu‘bānī snaky, snakelike, serpentine; eely
مثعب mat‘ab pl. مثاعب matā‘ib  drain
ثعالة tu‘āla fox
داء الثعلب fox│ ta‘ālib  ثعالب pl. ta‘lab ثعلب
alopecia (med.), loss of hair
 ثعلبى ta‘labī foxy, foxlike
ثعلبة ta‘laba vixen; O tetter (med)
ثغر tagir pl. ثغور tugūr front tooth; mouth; port, harbor, inlet, bay; seaport
ثغرة tagra pl. ثغر tugar breach, crevasse, crack, rift, crevice; opening, gap; cavity, hollow; narrow mountain trail
ثغم tagam white, whiteness
ثاغم tāgim white (adj.)
ثغو) ثغا) tagā u (ثغاء tugā’) to bleat (sheep)
ثغاء tugā’ bleating, bleat
ثاغ tāgin bleating│ راغية وال ثاغية له ما (tagiya) he has absolutely nothing, he is deprived of all resources, prop.: he has neither a bleating (sheep) nor a braying (camel)
ثفر tafar pl. اثفار atfār crupper (of the saddle)
ثفل tufl dregs, lees, sediment; residues
ثفن III to associate (ه with s.o.), frequent s.o.’s (ھ) company; to pursue, practice (ه s.th.)
ثفنة taftna pl. -āt, ثفن tifan callus, callosity
اثفية look up alphabetically
وثق see ثقة
ثقب taqaba u (taqb) to bore, or drill, a hole (ھ in s.th.), pierce, puncture, perforate (ھ s.th.) II do. II and IV to light, kindle (ھ s.th.) V and VII to be pierced, be punctured, be perforated
ثقب taqb piercing, boring, puncture, perforation; (also tuqb pl. ثقوب tuqūb, اثقاب atqāb) hole, puncture, borehole, drill hole
ثقبة tuqba pl. ثقب tuqab hole
ثقاب and الثقاب عود ‘ūd al-tiqāb match- stick; matches
ثقوب  tuqūb keenness, acuteness (of the mind)
مثقب  mitqab pl. مثاقب matāqib  borer, drill, gimlet, auger, brace and bit, wimble, perforator; drilling machine
اثقاب itqāb kindling, lighting
ثاقب dqib penetrating, plercing, sharp (mind, eyes)│ النظر ثاقب t. an-naẓar perspicacity; sharp-eyed; الفكر ثاقب t. al-
fikr sagacity, acumen, mental acuteness; shrewd, sagacious, sharp-witted

ثاقبات tāqibāt borers (zool.)  103
ثقف taqifa a (taqf) to find, meet (ه s.o.); -- taqifa a and taqufa u to be skillful, smart, clever II to make straight, straighten (ھ s.th.); to correct, set right, straighten out ( ھ s.th.); to train, form, teach, educate (ھ s.o.); to arrest (ھ s.o.); to seize, confiscate (ه s.th.) III to fence (ه with s.o.) V to be trained, be educated
ثقافة taqāfa culture, refinement; education; (pl. -āt) culture, civilization
ثقافى taqāfī educational; intellectual; cultural│ ثقافى ملحق (mulḥaq) cultural attaché
ثقيف tatqīf cultivation of the mind; training, education; instruction
مثاقفة mutāqafa fencing, art or sport of fencing, swordplay, swordsmanship
تثقف tataqquf culturedness, culture, refinement, education
مثقف mutaqqaf educated; trained; cultured
ثقل taqula u (tiql, ثقالة taqāla) to be heavy; with ب to load or burden s.th., make s.th. heavy; to be hard to bear (على for s.o.), weigh heavily (على on), be burdensome, cumbersome, oppressive (على to s.o.); to be heavy-handed. sluggish, doltish, dull- witted; to be too dull, too sluggish (عن for s.th. to do s.th.), not to bother (or about) II to make heavy, weight (ھ s.th.); to burden, encumber (على s.o., ھ with s.th.), overburden (على s.o.), overtax s.o.’s (على) strength, ask too much (على of s.o.); to trouble, inconvenience, bother (على s.o. ب with s.th.), pester, molest (على s.o.)│ ثقل كاھلهand كاھله اثقل (kāhilahū) to burden s.o. or s.th; الميزان كاھل اثقل to burden the budget IV to burden (ه ,ھ s.o., s.th.); to oppress, distress (ه s.o.). weigh heavily (ه on); to be hard to bear (ه for s.o.)│ كاھله اثقل (kāhilahū) see II; VI to become or be heavy; to be troublesome, burdensome ( على to s.o.), trouble. oppress (على s.o.); to be sluggish. doltish. slow; to be in a bad mood, be sullen, grumpy; to find burdensome and turn away (عن from
 s.th.); not to bother (عن about); to be too dull, too sluggish (عن for s.th., to do s.th.) X to find heavy, hard. burdensome, troublesome (ھ s.th.), find annoying (ه ھ، s.o.. s.th.)│ظله استثقل (ẓillahū) to find s.o. unbearable, dislike s.o.
ثقل tiql pl. اثقال atqāl weight; burden load; gravity; heaviness│ االثقال رفع raf‘ al-
a. weight lifting (athlet.); النوعى الثقل
(nau‘ī) specific gravity
ثقل tiqal heaviness; sluggishness, dullness
ثقل taqal pl. اثقال atqāl load, baggage الثقالن at-taqalān the humans and the jinn ثقل taqla trouble, inconvenience,
 
discomfort
ثقل taqala heaviness; sluggishness, doltishness; dullness
ثقيل taqīl pl. ثقالء tuqalā’ , ثقال tiqāl heavy; weighty, momentous, grave, serious, important; burdensome, troublesome, cumbersome, oppressive; unpleasant, disagreeable, distasteful (person)│ الدم ثقيل t. ad-dam insufferable, unpleasant, disagreeable (person); ثقيل الروح t. ar-rūḥ doltish, dull (person); a bore; الظل ثقيل t. aẓ-ẓill disagreeable, insufferable (person); الفھم ثقيل t. al-fahm slow of understanding, slow-witted; ثقيل السمع t. as-sam‘ hard of hearing; ثقيلة صناعة (ṣinā‘a) heavy industry; ثقيل ماء heavy water (phys.)
اثقل atqal  heavier; more oppressive
مثقال mitqāl pl. مثاقيل matāqīl  weight (also s.th. placed as an equipoise on the scales of a balance); miskal, a weight (in Egypt = 24 ٤.٨٦ = قراط g)│ ذرة مثقال m.
104 darra the weight of a dust speck, i.e., a tiny amount; a little bit; من مثقال a little of, a little bit of
تثقيل tatqīl weighting, burdening; molestation
تثاقل tatāqul sluggishness, dullness
مثقل mutaqqal and mutqal burdened, encumbered; overloaded; weighted (ب with s.th.); oppressed (ب by); heavy
متثاقل mutatāqil sluggish, dull; sullen, grumpy
ثكل takila a (takal) to lose a child (ه), also: to be bereaved of a loved one (ه) by death IV ولدھا األم اثكل atkala l-umma waladuhā to bereave a mother of her son
ثكل takal state of one who has lost a friend or relative; mourning over the loss of a loved one
ثكالن taklān ( ) bereaved of a child
ثكلى taklā bereaved of a child (mother)
ثاكلة tākila pl. ثواكل tawākil  bereaved of a child (mother)
ثكنة tuknā pl. ثكن tukan, -āt barracks (mil.)
ثل talla u (ثلل talal) to tear down, destroy, overthrow, subvert (ھ s.th., esp. عرشا ‘aršan to topple a throne) VII to be subverted, overthrown (throne)
ثلة tulla pl. ثلل tulal troop, band, party, group (of people); military detachment
ثلب talaba i (talb) to criticize, run down (ه s.o.); to slander, defame (ه s.o.)
ثلب talb slander, defamation
مثلبة matlaba pl. مثالب matālib  shortcoming, defect, blemish, stain, disgrace
ثالب tālib slanderous, defamatory; slanderer
ثلث II to triple, make threefold (ھ s.th.); to do three times (ھ s.th.)
ثلث tult pl. اثالث atlāt one third; tulut a sprawling, decorative calligraphic style
ثلثا three; talāt) ثالث (f. talāta ثالثة
talātan three times, thrice
ثالثى talātī tertiary; Tertiary (geol.)│ما الثالثى قبل pre-Tertiary
ثالث عشرة f. ‘ašara, talātata ثالثة عشر
talāta ‘ašrata thirteen
الثالث at-tālit the third; ثالثا tālitan thirdly;
second a of ثالثة ٠٦/١
ثالثون talātūn thirty
at-t. yaum يوم الثلثاء and at-talatā’ الثلثاء
Tuesday
ثالث tulāt  and مثلث mutallat three at a time
 ثالثى tulātī tripartite, consisting of three, (gram.) triliteral, consisting of three radicals; tri-; trio (mus. )│الزوايا ثالثى t. z- zawāyā triangular; الورقات ثالثى  t. l- waraqāt trifoliate
ثالوث tālūt Trinity (CM.); trinity, triad; triplet│ الثالوث زھرة zahrat at-t. pansy (bot.)
تثليث tatlīt doctrine of the Trinity; Trinity
(Chr.)
تثليثى tatlītī trigonometric(al)
threefold; triple, tripled, mutallat مثلث (letter); dots diacritical three having الراية (geom.)│ triangle -āt) (pl. triangular; and (‘alam) العلم المثلث (rāya), المثلثة األلوان acute- (ḥadd) المثلث الحاد tricolor; the المثلث az-zawāyā m. مثلث الزوايا triangle; angled (mutasāwā المثلث المتساوى الساقين triangular; المثلث المتساوى triangle; isosceles s-sāqain) المثلث القائم triangle; equilateral األضالع triangle right-angled
حساب المثلثات and al-mutallatāt المثلثات
ḥisāb al-m. trigonometry
ثلج talaja u: السماء ثلجت (samā’u) it snowed, was snowing; -- talija a to be delighted, 105 be gladdened (soul, heart; ب by) II to cool with ice (ھ s.th.); to freeze, turn into ice (ھ s.th.) IV السماء اثلجت it snowed, was snowing; to cool, moisten (ھ s.th.)│اثلج صدره (ṣadrahū) to delight, please, gratify
s.o. V to become icy, turn into ice, congeal; to freeze
ثلج talj pl. ثلوج tulūj snow; ice; artificial ice│الثلج ندفة nadfat at-t. snowflake
ثلجى taljī snowy, snow- (in compounds); icy, glacial, ice- (in compounds)
ثليج talīj icy
ثالج tallāj pl. -ūn ice vendor
ثالجة tallāja pl. -āt iceberg, ice floe; refrigerator, icebox
مثلجة matlaja pl. مثالج matālij  icebox, refrigerator; cold-storage plant
مثلوج matlūj snow-covered; iced, icy;
مثلوجات frozen food; iced beverages
مثلج mutallaj iced; icy, ice-cold
ثلم talama i (talm) to blunt, make jagged (ھ s.th.), break the edge of (ھ); to make a
breach, gap or opening (ھ in a wall); to defile, sully (ھ reputation, honor);
--talima a to be or become jagged, dull, blunt II to blunt (ھ s.th.) V to become blunt VII to be defiled, be discredited (reputation)
ثلم talm nick, notch; breach, opening, gap; crock, fissure, rift│الصيت ثلم t. aṣ-ṣīt defamation
ثلمة tulma pl. ثلم tulam = talm│ ثلمة سد sadda talmatan to fill a gap; تسد ال ثلمة (tusaddu) a gap that cannot be closed, an irreparable loss
ثالم talim dull, blunt
مثلوم matlūm defiled, sullied (reputation, honor)
مثلم mutatallim blunted, blunt; cracking (voice)
الصيت منثلم muntalim aṣ-ṣīt of ill repute, of dubious reputation
ثم tamma there ثم min tamma hence, therefore, for that reason
ثم tumma then, thereupon; furthermore, moreover; and again, and once more (emphatically in repetition)│كال ثم كال (kallā) no and a hundred times no! ثم من min tamma then, thereupon
ليس ثمةis│ there there; )ثمت( tammata ثمة
there isn't
ثمام tumām a grass│الثمام طرف على (ṯarafi t-t.) within easy reach, handy; على جعله الثمام طرف he made it readily understandable, he presented it plsusibly for all
اثمد look up alphabetically
ثمر tamara u to bear fruit IV do. X to profit, benefit (ھ from); to exploit, utilize (ھ s.th.); to invest profitably (ھ money)
ثمر tamar pl. ثمار timār, اثمار atmār fruits, fruit (coll.); result, effect, fruit, fruitage; yield, profit, benefit, gain
ثمرة tamara (n. un. of tamar) pl. -āt fruit; result, effect; yield, profit, benefit, gain
استثمار istitmār exploitation (also pol.- econ.), utilization, profitable use
 مثمر mutmir fruitful, productive, profitable, lucrative
مستثمر mustatmir pl. -ūn exploiter (pol.- econ.); beneficiary
ثمل tamila a (tamal) to become drunk IV to make drunk, intoxicate (ه s.o.)
ثمل tamal intoxication, drunkenness ثملة tamala drunken fit, drunkenness ثمل tamil intoxicated, drunk(en)
ثمالة tumāla residue, remnant, dregs (of a liquid), heeltap (of wine); .cum, foam, froth 106
  ثمنII to appraise, asses, estimate (ھ s.th.), determine the price or value (ھ of s.th.); to price (ھ s.th.)│ ثمل ال lā yutammanu invaluable, inestimable, priceless
price, atmina اثمنة atmān, اثمن pl. ثمن price; cost (aṣlī) الثمن األصلىvalue│ cost; value nominal par, (asāsī) الثمن األساسى
ثمين tamīn costly, precious, valuable
اثمن atman  costlier, more precious, more valuable
تثمين tatmīn estimated, appraisal, assessment, valuation, rating
مثمون matmūn object of value
مثمن mutammin estimator, appraiser│ مثمن خبير assessor
مثمن mutamman prized, valued, valuable, precious
مثمن mutmin costly, precious, valuable
مثمن mutman object of value
 ثمانية tamāniya (f. ثمان tamānin) eight
ثماني عشرة f. ‘ašara, tamāniyata ثمانية عشر
tamāniya ‘ašrata eighteen
ثمن pl. اثمان atmān one-eighth
ثمنة tumna pl. -āt a dry measure (Eg. =
1/3 ٨٥٢. = قدح l; Pal. = ca. 2.25 l)
ثمانون tamānūn eighty
الثامن at-tāmin the eighth
مثمن mutamman eightfold; octagonal
ثنة tunna pl. ثنن tunan fetlock
ثندوة tunduwa pl. ثناد tanādin breast (of the male)
ثنى tanā i (tany) to double, double up, fold, fold up, fold under (ھ s.th.); to bond, flex (ھ s.th.); to turn away, dissuade, keep, prevent, divert (ه عن s.o. from)│ عنان ثنى فرسه (‘ināna farasihī) he galloped off II to double, make double (ھ s.th.); to do twice, repeat (ھ s.th.); to pleat, plait (ھ s.th.); to form the dual (ھ of a word); to provide with two diacritical dots (ھ a letter) IV to commend, praise, laud, extol (على s.th., s.o.), speak appreciatively (على of)│ اثنى الثناء عاطر عليه (‘āṯira tanā’) to speak in the most laudatory terms of s.o. V to double, become double; to be doubled; to be repeated; to bond, fold; to be bent, be folded. be folded up or under; to walk with a swinging gait VII to bend, bend up, down or over, lean, incline, bow; to fold, be foldable, be folded back; to turn away ( عن from), give up, renounce (عن s.th.); to turn, face (لI toward); to apply o.s., turn ( الى to s.th.); (with foll. imperf.) to set out, prepare (to do s.th.) X to except, exclude ( ه من or ھ s.th. or s.o. from), make an exception (ھ of s.th.)
ثنى tany bonding; folding; turning away, dissuasion, keeping, prevention
ثنى tiny pl. اثناء atnā’ fold, pleat, plait, crease (in cloth); bond, twist│ ثنى بعد ثنيا tinyan ba‘da tinyin from time to time
course the in during; (prep.) atnā’ اثناء فى اثناء ذلك, فى تلك do.; atnā’i fī فى اثناءof│ all during meantime, the in االثناء، اثناء ذلك meanwhile time, this
ثنية tanya pl. tanyāt fold, pleat, plait, crease (in cloth)
ثنية tanya pl. ثنايا tanāyā middle incisor; narrow pass; mountain trail│ ثنايا فى in, inside, among, between, frequently only a fuller, rhetorically more elegant expression for "in". e.g., نفسه ثنايا فى in his heart, inwardly, الكتاب ثنايا فى in the book; ثنايا بين in, inside, among, between; طالع الثنايا ṯallā‘ at-t. one with high-flung aspirations 107
ثناء tanā’ commendation, praise, eulogy; appreciation
ثناء tunā’  and مثنى matnā two at a time
 ثنوى tanawī dualist
ثنوية tanawīya dualism
ثنائى tanā’ī laudatory, eulogistic
ثنائى tunā’ī twofold, double, dual, binary, bi-; biradical (gram.); duet, duo (mus.)│ المشوار ثنائى محرك (muḥarrik t. l- mišwār) two-cycle engine
O ثنائية tunā’īya dualism; duet, duo
(mus.)
two itnatāni اثنتان f. itnāni, اثنان
itnatā اثنتا عشرة f. ‘ašara, itnā اثنا عشر twelve ‘ašrata
االثنين and al-itnaini yaum يوم االثنين
Monday
الثانى at-tānī the second; the next; ثانيا tāniyan and ثانية tāniyatan secondly; for the second time, once more, again│ ثانى اثنين t. itnain the second of a pair, pendant, companion piece, match
ثانية tāniya pl. ثوان tawānin second (time unit)
ثانوى tānawī secondary; minor│ثانوية امور matters of secondary importance, minor matters; ثانوية مدرسة secondary school; ثانوي تسويغ subletting
تثنية tatniya repetition; plaiting, pleating; doubling, gemination; (gram.) dual; second sequel (e.g., of a collection of short stories); commendation, praise, eulogy│ االشتراع تثنية Deuteronomy
انثناء intinā’ bending, flection; flexibility, foldability│ لالانثناء قابل foldable, folding
انثناءة intinā’a pl. -āt (n. vic.) bend, flexure, curve
استثناء istitnā’ exception, exclusion│ باستثناء with the exception of, except; بدون استثناء without exception
استثنائيا exoeptional; istitnā’ī استثنائى احوال استثنائية exception│ an as istitnā’īyan (jalsa) جلسة استثنائية emergencies; session emergency
مثنى matnīy folded; plaited, pleated; doubled
مثنى mutannan ouble, twofold; in the dual (gram.)
مستثنى mustatnan excepted, excluded (من from)
ثوى see ثوة
 ثوب) ثاب) tāba u to return, come back (also, e.g., a state or condition, الى or ل to s.o.); with ب: to return s.th. (الى to s.o.)│ الى ثاب نفسه to regain consciousness, come to; ثاب رشده اليه (rušduhū) to recover one’s senses II to reward (ه s.o.; said of God) IV to repay, requite (ھ ھ s.th. with); to reward ( ه على s.o. for) X to seek reward
ثوب taub pl. ثياب tiyāb, اثواب atwāb garment, dress; cloth, material; (fig.) garb, outward appearance, guise, cloak, mask; pl. ثياب clothes, clothing, apparel│ ثياب السھرة t. as-suhra formal dress, evening clothes; بسيط ثوب فى in plain, homely form; الثياب طاھر of flawless character, irreproachable
ثواب tawāb requital, recompense, reward (for good deeds); (Isl. Law) merit, credit (arising from a pious deed)
مثوبة matūba requital, recompense, reward (bestowed by God for good deeds)
مثاب matāb and مثابة matāba place to which one returns; meeting place; rendezvous; resort, refuge
مثابة matāba (with foll. genit.) place or time at which s.th. appears or recurs; 108 manner, mode, fashion; see also preceding entry│ بمثابة (with foll. genit.) like, as; tantamount to, equivalent to, having the same function as
yawn to VI) تثاوب = تثاءب )ثئب  
ثور) ثار) tāra u to stir, be stirred up, be  aroused, be excited; to swirl up, rise (dust); to arise (question, problem; a difficulty, وجھه فى fī wajhihī before s.o.); to be triggered, be unleashed, break out; to revolt, rebel, rise (على against); to rage, storm│ ثائره ثار (tā’irohū) to fly into a rage, become furious, flare up IV to agitate, excite (ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to stimulate (ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to irritate (ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to arouse, stir up, kindle, excite (ھ s.th., e.g., feelings), cause, provoke, awaken (ھ s.th.); to raise, pose, bring up (مسألة mas’alatan a question, a problem)│ اثار ثائرته (tā’iratahū) to infuriate s.o., excite
 s.o. X to excite, stir up, kindle (ھ s.th., esp. passions); to rouse (ھ s.th.); to arouse, awaken (ھ s.th., esp. feelings); to elicit, evoke (ھ wails, outcries, من from s.o.); to incite, set (ه على s.o. against)│ غضبه استثار (gaḍabahū) to infuriate s.o., make s.o. angry
ثور taur pl. ثيران tīrān bull, steer; ox; Taurus (astron.)│ الثور ذيل شوربة šōrabat dail at-t. oxtail soup
ثورة taura excitement, agitation; outbreak, outburst, fit (of fury, of despair, etc.); eruption (of a volcano); (pl. -āt) upheaval, uprising, insurrection, riot, rebellion, revolt, revolution│اھلية ثورة (ahlīya) internal strife, civil war
ثورى taurī revolutionary (adj. and n.)
ثوروى taurawī revolutionary (adj. and n.)
ثوران tawarān agitation, excitation,
flare-up, emption, outbreak, outburst, dust whirl
مثار matār incentive, stimulus, motive, spur, occasion, cause│ الجدل مثار m. al- jadal and النزاع مثار object of controversy, point of contention
اثارة itāra excitation, stirring up, kindling; agitation, incitement; provocation, (a)rousing, awakening; irritation, stimulation
ثائر tā’ir excited, agitated, raving, furious, mad; rebellious; fury, rage (in the idiomatic phrase ثائرة ثار see above); (pl. ثوار tuwwār) insurgent, rebel, revolutionary
ثائرة tā’ira pl. ثوائر tawā’ir  tumult; excitement, agitation; fury, rage
مثير mutīr exciting; provocative; stimulative, irritative; excitant, irritant, stimulant; instigator; germ, agent; pl. مثيرات stimulants
ثوريوم tōriyūm thorium (chem.)
ثول VII to swarm, crowd, throng (على around s.o.); to come over s.o. (على)
ثول law and النحل ثول t. an-nḥl swarm of bees
ثوم tūm (coll.; n. un. ة) garlic
ثوى tawā i (ثواء tawā’, ثوى tuwīy, مثوى matwan) to stay, live (ب at a place); to settle down ( ب at a place); pass. tuwiya to be buried IV to stay, live; to lodge, put up as a guest (ه s.o.)
ثوى tawīy guestroom
ثوة tūwa pl. ثوى tuwan signpost, road- sign
مثوى matwan pl. مثاو matāwin abode, habitation, dwelling; place of rest
ثيب tayyib pl. -āt a deflowered but unmarried woman, widow, divorcée
ثيتل taital pl. ثياتل tayātil  a variety of wild goat (Capra jaela) 109


ج

جثليق = jātalīq جاثليق
جؤجؤ ju’ju’ pl. جآجئ ja’āji  breast; prow, bow (of a ship)
جأر ja’ara a (ja’r, جؤار ju’ār) to low, moo; to supplicate, pray fervently (الى to God)
جأر ja’r, and جؤار ju’ār, lowing, mooing (of cattle)
 جاز giiz pl. -āt (Eg. spelling) gas
 جاز jāz jazz
جازون (Fr. gazon, Eg. spelling) gāzōn lawn
جأش ja’aša a (ja’š) to be agitated, be convulsed (with pain or fright)
جأش ja’š emotional agitation; heart, soul│ جأشه ربط rabaṯa ja’šahū to remain calm, composed, self-possesed; الجأش رابط or الجأش ثابت calm, composed, cool, self- possessed, undismayed; رابط بجأش with unswerving courage, unflinchingly
coat jacket, žakēta جاكيته and جاكته، جاكتة
جالون galōn gallon
جاليرى (Eg. spelling) galērī gallery (theat.) جام jām pl. –āt cup; drinking vessel; bowl جامكية jāmakīya pl. -āt, جوامك jawāmik  pay جاموس jāmūs pl. جواميس jawāmīs  buffalo
جاموسة jāmūsa buffalo cow
 جانرك (pronounced žānəreg, from Turk. caneriği; coll.; n. un. žānərgēye) a variety of small green plum with several stones (syr.)
جاه jāh rank, standing, dignity, honor, glory, fame
جاوه jāwa Java
جاوى jāwī Javanese; benzoin; (pl. -ūn) a Javanese
rye jāwadār جاودار
شاوش، شاويش = sergeant čāwīš جاويش
 جب jubb pl. اجباب ajbāb, جباب jibāb well, cistern; pit
 جبة jubba pl. جبب jubab, جباب, jibāb, جبائب jabā’ib  jubbah, a long outer garment, open in front, with wide sleeves
ajbāḥ اجباح jibāḥ, جباح ajbuḥ, اجبح pl. jabḥ جبح
beehive
جبخانة jabḳāna, jabaḳāna powder magazine; ammunition; artillery depot
جبر jabara u (jabr, جبور jubūr) to set (ھ broken bones); to restore, bring back to normal (ھ s.th.); to help back on his feet, help up (ه s.o.; e.g., on. fallen into poverty); to force, compel (ه على s.o. to do s.th.)│ خاطره جبر (ḳāoṯirahū) to console, comfort, gratify, oblige s.o.; to treat (s.o.) in a conciliatory or kindly manner II to set (ھ broken bones) III to treat with kindness with friendliness (ه s.o.), be nice (ه to s.o.) IV to force, compel (ه على s.o. to do s.th.); to hold sway (على over) V to show o.s. proud, haughty; to act strong, throw one’s weight around; to show o.s. strong or powerful, demonstrate one’s strength or power; to be set (broken bones)│ ﷲ تجبر بابنك (bi-bnika) God has demonstrated His power on your son, i.e., He has taken him unto Himself VII to be mended. repaired, restored
جبر jabr setting (of broken bones); force, compulsion; coercion, duress; power, 110 might; (predestined, inescapable) decree of fate; جبرا jab,an forcibly, by force│ علم الجبر ‘ilm al-j. algebra; البحر جبر يوم yaum j. al-baḥr a local holiday of Cairo (the day on which, in former times, the water of the Nile was channeled into the now- abandoned ḳalīg, or City Canal, thus mar
فىng the beginning of the irrigation season)
جبرى jabrī algebraic; compulsory, forced; -- jabarī an adherent of the doctrine of predestination and the inescapability of fate; fatalist
جبرية jabarīya an Islamic school of thought teaching the inescapability of fate; fatalism
جبار jabbār, pl. -ūn, جبابر jabābir , جبابرة jabābira giant; colossus; tyrant, oppressor; almighty, omnipotent (God); gigantic, giant, colossal, huge; Orion (astron.)│ الخطوة جبار j. al-ḳuṯ.wa striding powerfully, taفىng buge strides
جبارة jibāra (art of) bonesetting
جبائر pl. jībāra جبارة and jabīra جبيرة
jabā’ir  splint (surg.)
جبروت jabarūt omnipotence; power, might; tyranny
جبرياء jibriyā’  pride, haughtiness
O تجبير tajbīr, العظام تجبير orthopedics اجبار ijbār compulsion, coercion اجبارى ijbārī forced, forcible,
compulsory, obligatory│االجبارى التجنيد compulsory recruitment; military conscription
جابر jābir and مجبر mujabbir, bonesetter
مجبور majbūr and مجبر mujbar forced, compelled
جبرئيل jabra’īl  جبريل jibrīl  Gabriel
  جبسII to plaster, coat, patch, or fix with plaster (ھ s.th.); to put in a cast, set in plaster (ھ s.th.)
جبس jibs gypsum; plaster of Paris
جباسة jabbāsa gypsum quarry; plaster kiln
 جبس jabas (coll.; n. un. ة; syr.) watermelon(s)
  جبل jabala u i (jabl) to mold, form, shape, fashion (ھ s.th.); to knead (ھ s.th.); to create (ه على s.o. with a natural disposition or propensity for); pass. على جبل (jubila) to be born for, be naturally diaposed to, bave a propensity for
 جبلة jibla, jibilla pl. -āt natural disposition, nature, temper
  جبل jabal pl. جبل jibāl, اجبال ajbāl mountain; mountains, mountain range│ االلب جبال j. al-alb the Alpes; االوراس جبال the Aurès Mountains (in E Algeria); جليد جبل iceberg; سينا جبل j. sīnā Mount Sinai; طارق جبل Gibraltar; نار جبل volcano
جبلى jabalī mountainous, hilly; mountain (adj.); montane; (pl. -ūn) highlander, mountaineer
جبالوى gabalāwī (eg.) highlander, mountaineer
جبالية gabalāya pl. -āt (eg.) grotto, cave
جبن jabuna u (jubn, جبانة jabāna) to be a coward, be fearful; to be too much of a coward (عن to do s.th.), shrink (عن from s.th.) II to cause to curdle (ھ milk); to make into cheese (ھ s.th.); to curdle; to accuse of cowardice, call a coward (ه s.o.)
V to curdle (milk), turn into cheese جبن jubn and جبانة jabāna cowardice جبن jubn and جبنة jubna cheese
جبان jabān pl. جبناء jubanā’  coward; cowardly
جبان jabbān cheese merchant
جبين jabīn pl. جبن jubun, اجبنة ajbina, اجبن ajbun forehead, brow; façade, front; face جبينى من min jabīnī I alone; السماء جبين على in the sky 111
جبينى jabīnī frontal
اجبن ajban  more cowardly
جبانة jabbāna pl. -āt cemetery
تجبين tajbīn cheese making, processing into cheese
 جبه jabaha a to moot, face, confront (ه s.o.) III to face, confront, oppose, defy (ه s.o., ھ s.th.), show a hold front (ه to); to face (ھ a problem, a difficulty)
جبھة jabha pl. جباه jibāh, جبھات jabahāt forehead, brow; front, face, façade; frontline, battle front
مجابھة mujābaha facing, confrontation, opposition
جبخانة see جبه خانة 
جبى jabā i (جباية jibāya) to collect, raise, levy ( ھ taxes, duties) II to prostrate o.s. (in prayer) VIII to pick, choose, elect (ھ s.th., ه s.o.)
جباية jibāya raising, levying (of taxes); (pl. oat) tax, duty, impost
جبائي jibā’ī tax- (in compounds); fiscal
مجبى majban pl. مجاب majābin tax, impost
جاب jābin pl. جباة jubāh tax collector, revenue officer, collector; (bus, etc.) conductor (ir.)
جابية jābiya pl. جواب jawābin pool, basin
جتا jatā (abbreviation of التمام جيب) cosine (math.)
جث jatta (jatt) and VIII to tear out, uproot (ھ a tree, also fig.)
جثة jutta pl. جثث jutat, اجثاث ajtāt body; corpse, cadaver; carcass
مجتث muitat uprooted (also fig.)
جثل jatl thick, dense (esp. hair)
جثليق jitlīq pl. جثالقة jatāliqa catholicos, primate of the Armenian Church
جثم jatama u i (jatm, جثوم jutūm) to alight, sit, perch (bird); to crouch, cower; to fall or lie prone, lie face down; to beset, oppress (على s.th.)
جثمة jatma (n. vic.) motionless sitting or lying
جثام jutām and جاثوم jātūm nightmare, incubus
جثمان jutmān pl. -āt hody, mortal frame
جثمانى jutmānī hodily, physical, corporeal
جاثم jātim pl. جثم juttam squatting, crouching; perching; prostrate, prone
(جثا (جثو jatā u (jutuw) to kneel, root on the knees; to bend the knee, genullect; to fall on one’s knees
جثو jutūw kneeling pooition
جثوة jutwa rock pile, mound; sepulchral mound, tumulus
مجثى majtan hassock
 جاث jātin kneeling; الجاثى Hercules (astron.)
جحد jaḥda a (jaiḥd, جحود juḥūd) to negate (ھ s.th.); to disclaim, disavow, disown, deny (ھ s.th.); to refuse, reject, repudiate (ھ s.th.); to renounce, forswear, adjure (ھ a belief); to deny (ه ھ s.o. his right)│ جحد جميله (jamīlahū) to he ungrateful to s.o.
جحد jaḥd denial; repudiation, disavowal, rejection, disclaimer; unbelief (rel.)
جحود juḥūd denial; evasion, dodging, shirking (of a moral obligation); ingratitude; repudiation, disavowal, rejection, disclaimer; unbelief (rel.)
جاحد jāḥid denier; infidel, unbeliever جحر VII to hide in ito hole or den (animal) جحر juḥr pl. اجحار ajḥār, جحور juḥūr
hole, den, lair, burrow (of animals) 112
جحش jaḥš pl. جحاش jiḥāš, جحشان jiḥšān, اجحاش ajḥāš young donkey; (pl. جحوش juḥūš) trestle, horse
جحشة ja□ša young female donkey
جحظ jaḥaẓa a (جحوظ juḥūẓ) to bulge, protrude (eyeball)
العين جحوظ juḥūz al-‘ain exophthalmic goiter, abnormal protrusion of the eyeball
جحف jaḥafa a (jaḥf) to peel off, scrape off (ھ s.th.); to sweep away (ھ s.th.); to have a bias (مع for), side (مع with s.o.) IV to harm, hurt, injure, prejudice (ب s.o., s.th.); to ruin. destroy (ب s.o., s.th.); to wrong (ب s.o.)
اجحاف ijḥāf injustice, wrong; bias, prejudice
مجحف mujḥif unjust, unfair; biased, prejudiced
جحفل jaḥfala pl. جحافل jaḥāfil  multitude, legion, host, large army; army corps (Syr.); eminent man
جحيم jaḥīm f. (also m.) fire, hellfire, hell
جحيمى jaḥīmī hellish, infernal
جخ jaḳḳa (eg.) to lord it, give o.s. airs; to boast, brag; (syr.) to dress up (slightly ironical)
جخاخ jaḳḳāḳ boaster, braggart
 جد jadd pl. جدود judūd, اجاد ajdād grand-father; ancestor, forefather│ االعلى الجد (a‘lā) ancestor
جدة jadda pl. -āt grandmother
 جد jadda i to be new; to be a recent development, have happened lately, have recently become a fact; to be added, crop up or enter as a new factor (circumstances, costs); to appear for the first time (also, e.g., on the stage); to be or become serious, grave; to be weighty, significant, important; to take فى s.th.) seriously; to strive earnestly فى for), go out of one’s way (فى to do s.th.), make every effort (فى in); to be serious, be in earnest (فى about), mean business; to hurry (فى one’s step) II to renew (ھ s.th.); to make anew, remake ( ھ s.th.); to modernize (ھ s.th.); to restore, renovate, remodel, refit, recondition, refurbish (ھ s.th.); to be an innovator, a reformer; to feature s.th. new or novel, produce s.th. new; to rejuvenate, regenerate, revive, freshen up (ھ s.th.); to renew, extend (ھ a permit); to begin anew, repeat (ھ s.th.), make a new start (ھ in s.th.); to try again (حظه ḥaẓẓahū one’s luck) IV to strive, endeavor, take pains; to apply o.s. earnestly and assiduously (فى to), be bent, be intent (فى on s.th.); to hurry (فى one's step); to renew, make new (ھ s.th.) V to become new, be renewed; to revive X to be new, be added or enter as a new factor, come newly into existence; to make new, renew (ھ s.th.)
جد iadd pl. جدود judūd good luck, good fortune
جد jidd seriousness, earnestness; diligence, assiduity, eagerness; جدا jiddan very, much│ بجد and جد من earnestly, seriously; باھظ جد jiddu bāhiẓin very high (price); عظيم جد j. ‘aẓīmin very great; االختالف جد يختلفون  (jidda l-iḳtilāf) they differ widely; ل الجد ساق على وقف (sāqi l-j.) to apply o.s. with diligence to, take pains in, make every effort to
جدى jiddī serious; earnest; جديا jiddīyan
in earnest, earnestly, seriously
جدية jiddīya earnestness; seriousness, gravity (of a situation)
 جدة jidda newness, recency, novelty; modernness, modernity; O rebirth, renaissance
جدة judda  Jidda (eeaport in W Saudi Arabia, on Red Sea) 113
جديد jadīd pl. جدد judud, judad new, recent; renewed; modem; novel, unprecedented│الجديدان al-jadīdān day and night; جديد من anew, again; (eg.) لنج جديد gadīd lang brand-new.
اجد ajadd  more serious, more intent; newer, more recent
تجديد tajdīd renewal (also. e.g., of a permit); creation of s.th. new origination; new presentation, new production (theat.); innovation; reorganization, reform; modernization; renovation, restoration, remodeling. refitting. reconditioning, refurbishing; rejuvenation, regeneration; pl. -āt innovations; new achievements
تجدد tajaddud renewal, regeneration, revival
جاد jādd in earnest, earnest; serious (as opposed to comic, funny)
جادة jādda pl. –āt, jawādd  main street; street
مجدود majdūd fortunate. lucky
مجدد mujaddid renewer; innovator; reformer
مجدد mujaddad renewed, extended; remodeled, reconditioned, renovated, restored; rejuvenated, regenerated, new, recent, young
مجد mujidd painstaking, diligent, assiduous
مستجد mustajidd new, recent; incipient
جدب jaduba u جدوبة judūba) to be or become dry, arid (soil) IV to suffer from drought, poverty or dearth; to be barren, sterile; to come to nothing, go up in smoke, fall flat, fizzle out; (syr.) to explode in the barrel (shell; mil.)
جدب jadb drought, barrenness, sterility; sterile, barren
جدباء f. ajdab , اجدب and jadīb جديب
jadbā’  barren, sterile
مجدب mujdib barren, sterile; desolate, arid; unproductive, unprofitable
جدث jadat pl. اجداث ajdāt grave, tomb
جدجد judjud pl. جداجد jadājid  cricket (zool.)
  جدر jadura u (جدارة jadāra) to be fit, suitable, proper. appropriate (ب for s.o., for s.th.); to befit, behoove (ب s.o., s.th.); to be worthy (ب of), deserve (ب s.th.)│ ذكره يجدر (dikruhū) and بالذكر يجدر it is worth mentioning
جدر jadr wall
جدير jadīr pl. -ūn جدراء judarā’  worthy, deserving (ب of s.th.); becoming, befitting (ب s.th.); proper, suited, suitable fit (ب for), appropriate (ب to)│ بالذكر جدير (dikr) worth mentioning
اجدر ajdar worthier; more appropriate; better suited, more suitable
جدارة jadāra worthiness; fitness, suitability, aptitude, qualification; appropriateness
judrān جدران judur, جدر pl. jidār جدار
wall
جدارى jidārī mural, wall (adj.)
  جدر judira (pass.) and II to have smallpox
جدرى judarī, jadarī smallpox
mujaddar مجدر and majdūr مجدور
infected with smallpox; pock-marked
مجدرة mujaddara dish made of rice or (in Syr.) of bulgur with lentils, onions and oil (eg., syr.)
جدع jada‘a a (jad‘) to cut off, amputate (ھ s.th., esp. some part of the body)
االنف بجدع bi-jad‘i l-anf (prop., at the cost of having the nose cut off) at any price, regardless of the sacrifice involved
اجدع ajda‘ mutilated (by having the nose, or the like cut off) 114
 □ جدع gada‘ (= جذع jada‘) pl. جدعان gid‘ān (eg.) young man, young fellow; heman
  جدف II to curse, blaspheme (على s.o., esp.
God)
تجديف tajdīf imprecation, blasphemy
  جدف jadafa i and II to row (o a boat)
 oar majādif  مجادف pl. mijdāf مجداف
  جدل jadala u i (jadl) to twist tight, tighten, stretch (ھ a rope); to braid, plait (ھ s.th., the hair, etc.) II to braid, plait, (ھ s.th.) III to quarrel, wrangle, bicker (ه with s.o.); to argue, debate (ه with s.o.); to dispute, contest (فى s.th.) VI to quarrel, have an argument; to carry on a dispute
جدل jadal quarrel, argument; debate, dispute, discussion, controversy│ فرض جدال faraḍa jadalan to assume for the sake of argument, propose as a basis for discussion
جدلى jadalī controversial; disputatious; a disputant
جدال jaddāl and مجدال mijdāl disputatious, argumentative; mijdāl see also below
جديلة jadīla pl. جدائل jadā’il  braid, plait; tress
مجدال mijdāl pl. مجادل majādil  flagstone, ashlar; see also above under jaddāl
جدال jidāl and مجادلة mujādala pl. –āt quarrel, argument; dispute, discussion, debate│ الجدال يقبل ال (yaqbalu) incontestable, indisputable; جدال ال lā jidāla and جدال بال bi-lā j. incontestably, indisputably
مجدول majdūl tightly twisted; braided, plaited; interwoven, intertwined (tress of hair); slender and trim, shapely (e.g., leg)
مجادل mujādil disputant, opponent in dispute
  جدول jadwal pl. جداول jadāwil  creek, brook, little stream; column; list, roster; index; chart, table, schedule│دراسى جدول (dirāsī) curriculum; البورصة جدول stock list,  خارج البورصة جدول (ḳārija) not quoted (stock exchange); االعمال جدول agenda; working plan
جدو) جدا) jadā u to give a present (على to s.o.) IV to give as a present (على ب s.o. s.th.), present (على ب s.o. with); to be of use, be useful, profitable│نفعا اجدى (naf‘an) to be useful; يجديك ال ھذا that won’t help you, that will be of no use (to you); ھذا عنك يجدى ما do.; فتيال يجدى ال (fatīlan) = فتيال  ى  يغن  الsee فتيل X to beg for alms; to implore, beg (ه ھ
s.o. for s.th.), plead (ھ for s.th.)
جداء jadā’ advantage, gain (.r for s.o.)
جدوى jadwā gift, present; advantage, benefit, gain│ جدوى بال (bi-lā) and غير على جدوى (gairi) of no avail, useless, futile, in vain
اجدى ajdā more useful, more advantageous
جدى jady pl. جداء jidā’, جديان jidyān kid, young billy goat; Capricorn (astron.); الجدى the North Star
جذ jadda u (jadd) to cut off, clip (ھ s.th.)
جذاذة jadāda pl. -āt slip of paper; pl. جذاذات small pieces, shreds, scraps, clippings
جذب jadaba i (jadb) to pull, draw (ھ s.th.); to attract (ھ s.th.); to pull out, draw out, whip out (ھ s.th.), draw (ھ a weapon, or the like); to appeal, prove attractive (ه to s.o.), attract, captivate, charm, allure (ه s.o.), win (ه s.o.) over (اليه to one’s side) III to contend (ه with s.o.) at pulling, tugging, etc. (ھ s.th.)│٥١١ الحبل جاذبه (ḥabla) to vie with s.o.; (to be able) to compete with s.o., measure up to s.o., be a match for s.o.; الكالم جاذبه or حديثا جاذبه or الحديث اطراف جاذبه (aṯrāfa l-ḥ.) he engaged him in conversation, involved him in a discussion; الحضارة اطراف جاذبه (aṯrāfa l- ḥaḍāra) to vie with s.o. in culture VI to pull back and forth (ه s.o.); to contend (ه، ھ for); to attract each other│ اطراف تجاذبوا الحديث (aṯrāfa l-ḥ.) they were deep in conversstion, they were talking together VII to be attracted; to be drawn, gravitate (JI toward, to) VIII to attract (ه s.o., ھ s.th., اليه to o.s.; also magn.); to allure, entice (ه s.o.); to win (ه s.o.) over (اليه to one's side); to draw, inhale (ھ puffs from a cigarette, etc.)
جذب jadb attraction; gravitation; appeal, lure, enticement, captivation│ جذبا اخذ to wrest away, take away by force; الجذب الجنسى (jinsī) sex appeal
جذاب jaddāb attractive; magnetic (fig.); suction, suctorial; winning, fetching, engaging; charming, enticing, captivating, gripping
اجذب ajdab  more attractive, more captivating
 انجذاب injidāb attraction, inclination, pronenesa, tendency
اجتذاب ijtidāb attraction; enticement, lure
جاذب jādib attractive; magnetic (fig.); winning, fetubing, engaging; charming, enticing, captivating, gripping
جاذبية jādibīya gravitation; attraction; attractiveness; charm, fascination; magnetism (fig.); lure, enticement│O
جاذبية force; gravitational ataql j. جاذبية الثقل جاذبية magnetism; (magnaṯisūya) مغنطيسية appeal sex al-jins j. الجنس
مجذوب majdūb attracted; possessed, maniacal, insane; (pl. مجاذب majādib ) maniac, lunatic, madman, idiot│مستشفى المجاذيب mustašfā l-m. mental hospital
متجاذب mutajādib mutually attractive; belonging together, inseparable
منجذب munjadib attracted; inclined, tending (الى to)
جذر jadara u (jadr) to uproot, tear out by the roots (ھ s.th.) II do.; to extract the root (ھ of a number; math.); to take root
جذر jidr, jadr pl. جذور judūr root (also math.); stem, base, lower end; (pl. اجذار ajdār) stub (of a receipt book, or the like)│ تربيعى جذر (tarbī‘ī) square root (math.)
جذرى jidrī, radical, roct (adj.)
تجذير tajdīr evolution, root extraction
(math.)
جذع jada‘ pl. جذع jud‘ān young man, young fellow (cf. □ جدع gada‘); new, incipient│ جذعة الحرب عادت (ḥarbu, jada‘atan) the war broke out again, started all over again; جذعا االمر اعاد (l-amra) he reopened the whole affair, he reverted to the earlier status
جذع jid‘ pl. اجذاع ajdā‘, جذوع judū‘ stem, trunk.; stump, tree stump; torso
جذعى jid‘ī truncal
جذف II to row (ھ a boat)
oar majādif  مجاذف pl. mijdāf مجذاف
جذل jadala a (jadal) to be happy, gay, exuberant, rejoice IV to make happy, gladden, cheer (ه s.o.)
جذل jidl pl. اجذال ajdāl, جذول judūl stump (of a tree)
جذيل jadīl wooden post on which camels rub themselves
جذل jada1 gaiety, hilarity, exuberance, happiness 116
جذل jadil pl. جذالن judlān gay, hilarious, cheerful, in high spirits, exuberant, happy
جذالن jadlān  gay, hilarious, cheerful, in high spirits, exuberaut, happy
جذم ijdama i (jadm) to out off, chop off (ھ s.th., esp. a part of the body); to remove, ta.ke out, excise (ھ e.g., the tonsils, the appendix; surg.); pass. judima to be afllicted with leprosy
root ajdām اجذام judūm, جذوم pl. jidm جذم
جذام judām leprosy
جذامة judāma stubble
اجذام ajdām  pl. جذامى jadmā mutilated (from having an arm, a hand, etc., cut off); leprous; leper
مجذوم majdūm leprous; leper
جذمور judmur stump
جذوة jadwa, jidwa, judwa pl. جذى jidan, judan,
جذاء jidā’ firebrand; burning log
جر jarra u (jarr) to draw, pull (ھ s.th.); to drag, tug, haul (ھ s.th.): to tow (ھ s.th.); to trail (ھ s.th.); to drag along (ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to draw (ھ على s.th. on s.o.), bring (ھ s.th.) down (على upon s.o.); to lead (الى to), bring on, cause (الى s.th.); to entail (ھ e.g., some evil, على for s.o.); (gram.) to pronounce the final consonant with i, put (a word) into tho genitive│جريرة جر (jarīratan) to commit an outrage, a crime ( على against s.o.); قيودا جر (quyūdan) to be  in shackles, go shackled; قرصه الى النار جر (qurṣihī) to secure advantages for o.s., feather one’s nest; بكلمة لسانه يجر ال (lisānahū bi-kalima) he won’t let a word escape his lips IV to ruminate VII passive of I; to be driven; to be swept along, drift, float│ الوراء الى انجر (warā’i) to withdraw, fall back, give way VIII to ruminate│ اجتر آالمه (ālāmahū) to mull over one’s grief
جر jarr pull(ing), drawing, draft.; traction, drag(ging), tugging, towage,
 hauling; bringing on, causing; genitive│ الجر حرف ḥarf al-j. (gram.) preposition; جرا وھلم wa-halumma jarran and so forth
جرة jarra pl. جرار jirār (earthenware) jar
جرة jarra, jurra trail, track; rut (left by a wagon)│ قلم بجرة bi-j. qalam with one stroke of the pen
جرة jirra cud (of a ruminant)
جرى من min jarrā because of│ جراك من because of you, on your account, for your sake
جراء من min jarā’i because of, due to│من أن جراء because
جرار jarrār huge, tremendous (army); potter; (pl. -āt) tractor; tugboat, steam tug, towing launch
(syr.) jawārīr  جوارير pl. jārūr جارور
drawer (of a desk, etc.)
جارورة jārūra (leb.) rake (tool)
جريرة jarīr pl. جرائر jarā’ir  guilt; offense, outrage, crime│ جريرة من min jarīrati because of, on account of
جرارة jarrāra pl. -āt a variety of scorpion; tractor
مجر mijarr trace, tug (of a harness)
مجرة majarra galaxy
انجرارية injirārīya (eg.) towage charges for watercraft
مجرور majrūr drawn, dragged, towed, etc.; word governed by a preposition, word in the genitive form; (pl. مجارير magārir ) drain, sewer (eg.); مجارير sewers, sewage system (eg.)
مجتر mujtarr ruminant (adj. and n.)
جرؤ jaru’a u (جرأة jur’a, جراءة jarā’a) to dare, venture, risk, hazard (على s.th.), take the risk (على of, ان of doing s.th.), have the 117 courage (على for s.th.) II to encourage (ه على s.o. to s.th.) V to dare, venture, risk. hazard (على s.th.) VIII to be venturesome, be daring; to become bold, make bold (على with s.o.); to venture (على s.th. or upon s.th.), have the audacity (على to do s.th.)
جرئ jarī’ pl. اجرياء ajriyā’  bold, courageous (على ب، in s.th.); forward,
immodest, insolent; daring, reckless, fool- bardy
جرأة jur’a and جراءة jarā’a courage, boldness, daring; forwardness, insolence
مجترئ mujtari’ bold, forward جراج (Fr.) garāž pl. -āt garage (eg.) جرام grām gram (eg.)
جرانيت granīt granite (eg.)
جرانيتى granītī granitic (eg.)

 جرب jariba a (jarab) to be mangy; (eg.) to fade (color) II to test (ھ s.th.); to try, try out, essay (ھ s.th.); to sample (ھ s.th.); to rehearse, practice (ھ s.th.); to attempt (ھ s.th.); to put to the test, try, tempt (ھ s.o.)│ فى نفسه جرب to try one’s hand at; االيام جرب (ayyāma) to gather experience
جرب jarab mange; itch, scabies
جرب jarib mangy; scabby
جرب pl. jarbā’ , جرباء f. ajrab , اجرب
jurb and جربان jarbān  mangy; scabby
جراب jirāb pl. اجربة ajriba, جربjurub sack, bag, traveling bag; knapsack; scrotum; covering, case; sheath, scabbard (for the sword)
جراب jurāb pl. -āt stocking, sock
جريب jarīb a patch of arable land
تجربة tajriba pl. تجارب tajārib  trial, test; tryout; attempt; practice, rehearsal; scientific test, experiment; probation; trial, tribulation; temptation; experience, practice; proof sheet, galley proof, also مطبعية تجربة (maṯba‘īya)
تجريب tajrīb trial, test(ing); trial, tribulation; temptation
تجريبى tajrībī trial, test (adj.); experimental; based on experience, empirical│التجريبى النفس علم (‘ilm an-nafs) experimental psychology
O تجريبية  tajrībīya empiricism (philos.)
مجرب mujarrib experimental; tester; examiner; tempter
مجرب mujarrab tried, tested; proven or establisbed by experience, time-tested,
 time-tried; experienced, practiced, seasoned; man of experience
  جورب look up alphabeticaUy
جربزة = jarbada جربذة
جربز jurbuz pl. جرابزة jarābiza impostor, confidence man, swindler
جربزة jarbaza (also جربذة) deception, swindle
jerboa jarābī‘  جرابيع pl. )يربوع (= jarbū‘ جربوع
(zool.)
جربندية jarabandīya (and جرابندية) knapsack, rucksack
جرثوم jurtūm, جرثومة jurtūma pl. جراثيم jarātīm  root; origin; germ; microbe, bacillus, bacterium│ الجرثوم تحت taḥt al-j. inframicrobe
جراج look up alphabetically
جرجر jarjara (جرجرة jarjara) to gargle; to jerk or pull back and forth; to trail, drag (ھ s.th.); to tow away (ھ s.th.)│ خطاه جرجر (ḳuṯāhū) to drag one’s feet, shuffle along II tajarjara pass. and refl. of I
جرجرة jarara gargling; rombling noise; rumble, clatter (of a wagon)
جرجر jirjir (large, thick) beans
جرجير jirjīr watercress (eg., syr.) 118
جرح jaraḥa a (jarḥ to wound (ه s.o.); to injure, hurt (ه s.o.; also fig., the feelings) II to invalidate (ھ teatimony), challenge, declare unreliahle (ه a witness), take formal exception (ھ ه، to) VIII to commit (ھ an outrage, a crime)│ السيآت اجترح (sayyi’āt) to do evil things
جرح jurḥ pl. جراح jirāḥ, جروح jurūḥ, جروحات jurūḥāt, اجراح ajrāḥ wound, injury, lesion
جراح االسنانsurgeon│ -ūn pl. jarrāḥ جراح
dental surgeon
جراحة jirāḥa surgery
عملية جراحية surgical│ jirāḥī جراحى
(‘amalīya) surgical operation
جريح jarīḥ pl. جرحى jarḥā wounded, injured, hurt
تجريح tajrīḥ surgery; defamation, disparagement
جارح jarīḥ injuring; wounding, stinging, painful, hurting; rapacious (beast), predatory
جارحة jāriḥa pl. جوارح jawāriḥ  predatory animal or bird│ الطير جوارح j. aṯ-ṯair predatory birds
جوارح jawāriḥ  limbes, extremities (of the hody)│ جوارحه بكل with might and main, with all his strength
majārīḥ  مجاريح pl. majrūḥ مجروح
wounded, injured, hurt
جرد jarada u (jard) to peel, pare (ھ s.th.); to remove the shell, peel, rind or husk (ھ of s.th.); to denude, diveet, strip, bare (ھ s.th.); (com.) to take stock; to make an inventory (البضائع of goods on hand) II to peel, pare (ھ s.th.); to remove the shell, peel, rind or husk (ھ of s.th.); to denude, divest, strip, dispossess, deprive (ھ من or ه
s.o. or s.th. of); to withhold (ه من from s.o. s.th.); to draw, unsheathe (السيف the sword); to unleash (ھ على s.th. against s.o.); to send, dispatch (ھ a military detachment, troops, ضد or على against s.o.); to free (ھ من or ه s.o. or s.th. from); to isolate (ھ s.th.); to abstract (ھ s.th.); to divest (من ss.o. of his citizenship, of a rank, of a vested right, etc.)│ السالح من جرده to disarm s.o.; من نفسه جرد to free o.s. from, rid o.s. of, give up s.th. V pass. of II; to strip o.s., rid o.s., get rid (من or عن of), free
o.s. (من or عن from); to be free (من or عن from, ل for a task); to devote o.s. exclusively (ل to s.th.); to give up, renounce (من or عن s.th.); to isolate o.s. ; to be absolute
جرد jard bare, threadbare, shabby, worn;
(com.) inventory; stocktaking
جريد jarīd without vegetation, barren, bleak, stark (landscape)
اجراد ajrād , f. جرداء jardā’ , pl. جرد jurd desolate, bleak, without vegetation; hairless, bald; threadbare shabby, worn (garment); open, unprotected (border)
جراد jarād (coll.; n. un. ة) locust(s)│ جراد الرحال (raḥḥāl) migratory locust(s); جراد البحر j. al-baḥr langouste, sea cray-fish; بجرادھا bi-jarādihā in its entirety
 جريد jarīd palm branches stripped of their leaves; jeered, a blunt javelin used in equestrian games
of un. (n. jarā’id  جرائد pl. jarīda جريدة roster, register, list, stalk; palm-leaf )جريد (yaumīya) جريدة يوميةnewspaper│ index; al-masā’ j. جرائد المساء newspaper; daily الجريدة and الجريدة الناطقة papers; evening the newsreel tho السينمائية
اجرودى ajrūdī (syr.) beardless, hairless مجرد mijrad pl. مجارد majārid  scraper تجريد tajrīd peeling. paring;
disrobement, stripping; denudation; deprivation; divestment; disarmament; dispatching (of troops); freeing; isolation; abstraction│السالح من تجريد disarmament 119
tajārīd  تجاريد -āt pl. tajrīda تجريدة
military detachment, expeditionary force
تجرد tajarrud freedom (من or عن from); isolatedness, isolation; independence, impartiality; absoluteness; abstractness, abstraction
مجرد mujarrad denuded, bare, naked; freed, free (من or عن from); pure, mere, nothing more than; sole; very, absolute; abstract; selfless, disinterested; 1st stem of tbe verb (gram.)│with foll. noun in genitive = mere, sheer, nothing but:) مجرد لھو mujarradu lahwin mere play, just fun; المجردة بالعين with the naked eye; ما بمجرد
bi-mujarradi mā as soon as, at the very moment when
جردل jardal pl. جرادل jaradil  bucket, pail
جرذ jurad pl. جرذان jirdān, jurdān large rat
جرذون jirdaun pl. جراذين jarādīn  large rat
 جرس jarasa i (jars) to ring, toll, knell, (re)sound II to make experienced, inure by severe trials, sorely try (ه s.o.; time, events); to compromise, disgrace, discredit, expose, bring into dierepute (ب s.o.)
جرس jars, jirs sound, tone
جرس jaras pl. اجراس ajrās bell
جرسة jursa defamation, public exposure; scandal, disgrac
  جرساية jirsāya, جرسية jirsīya pl. -āt jersey, woolen sweater; جرسى jersey cloth
جرش jaraša u (jarš) to crush (ھ s.th.); to grate, bruise, grind (ھ s.th.)
جرش jarš a grating, scraping noise
جريش jarīš crushed, bruised, coarsely ground; crushed grain; grits
جاروشة jārūša pl. جوارش jawarīš  quern, hand mill (for grinding grain)
جرض jaraḍa a (jaraḍ): بريقه جرض (bi-rīqihī) he choked on his saliva, could not swallow his saliva (because of excitement, alarm, or grief), he was very upset, in a atate of great agitation, deeply moved; -- jaraḍa u (jarḍ) to choke, sulfocate (ه s.o.) IV بريقه اجرضه (cf. I) to alarm s.o., fill s.o. with apprehension
ḥāla حال الجريض دون القريض jarīḍ: جريض
l.j. dūna l-qarīḍ (proverb; lit.: choking prevented poetry, i.e.) in the face of death one does not think of rhyming (among other interpretations)
جرع jara‘a a (jar‘) and jari‘a a (jara‘) to swallow, gulp, devour (ھ s.th.); to pour down, toss down (ھ a drink) II to make (ه s.o.) swallow (ھ s.th.); to gulp down V to drink (ھ s.th.) VIII to swallow, gulp down (ھ s.th.)
جرعة jur‘a, jar‘a pl. جرع jura‘, -āt gulp, mouthful, draught; potion, dose (med.)
جرف jarafa u (jarf) and VIII to sweep away (ھ s.th.); to wash away (ھ s.th.); to shovel away (ھ s.th.); to remove (ھ s.th.); to tear away, carry off (ھ s.th.); to carry along (ھ or ه s.o. or s.th.) VII to be swept away, be carried away
جرف jurf, juruf pl. جروف jurūf, اجراف ajrāf undercut bank or shore; clilf, steep slope, precipice; bluff (along a river or coast)│ جليدي جرف (jalīdī) avalanche
  jarārīf جراريف -āt, pl. jarrāfa جرافة
rake; harrow
majārif  مجارف pl. majraf مجرف
torrent, .trong current
مجرفة mijrafa shovel, scoop; (syr.) mattock; trowel
 مجراف mijrāf pl. مجارف majārīf  shovel, scoop
جارف jārif torrential (stream, mountain creek); stormy, violent (emotions, passions) 120
الجركس al-jarkas the Circassians
jarākisa جراكسة pl. jarkasī جركسى
circassian (adj. and n.)
جرم jarama i (jarm) to sone (الحم al-laḥma the meat); -- to commit an offense, a crime, an outrage (على or الى against s.o.), sin (على or الى against s.o.), injure, harm, wrong (على or الى s.o.) II to incriminate, charge with a crime (ه s.o.; syr.) IV to commit a crime, to sin (على or الى against s.o.), do wrong ( على or الى to s.o.), harm, wrong (على or الى s.o.) VIII = IV
جرم garm pl. جروم gurūm (eg.) long, flat- bottomed sarge, lighter (naut.)
جرم jirm pl. اجرام ajrām, جرم jurum body; mass, sulk, volume (of a body)│ االجرام الفلكية (falakīya) the celestial bodies
jurūm جروم ajrām, اجرام pl. iunn جرم
offense, crime, sin
جرم ال lā jarama surely, certainly, of course
جريم jarīm hulking, bulky, huge, voluminous, of great size
crime; jarā’im  جرائم pl. jarīma جريمة جريمة كبرى or)عظمى sin│( offense; قانون الجرائم offense; capital uẓma) (kubrā, code penal
اجرام ijrām crime; culpability, delinquency
اجرامى ijrāmī criminal
مجروم لحم laḥm majrūm fillet (meat) مجرمة سنة sana mujarrama an entire year مجرم mujrim criminal; (pl. -ūn) a
criminal; evildoer, culprit, delinquent│ عائد مجرم recidivous criminal
جرامز jarāmiz  and جراميز jarāmīz  limbs, legs│ جراميزه ضم (ḍamma) he beat it, he made off
الجرمان al-jarmān the Germanic tribes, the Teutons
جرمانى jarmānī Germanic, Teutonic
  جرن jurn pl. اجران ajrān (stone) basin; mortar; (eg.) threshing floor, barn│ المعمودية جرن j. al-ma‘mūdīya baptismal font
  جران jirān the front part of a camel’s neck│ بجرانه ضرب to become established, take root; جرانه عليه القى (alqā, jirānahū) to apply o.s. to s.th. and adjust to it, accustom o.s. to s.th.
جرنال jurnāl (eg. also gurnāl) pl. جرانيل žarānīl  (eg., garānīl ) journal, newspaper, periodical
جرانيت granīt granite
جرانيتى grānītī granitic
جرو jarw (jirw, jurw) pl. اجر ajrin, جراء jirā’, اجراء ajrā’, اجرية ajriya puppy, whelp, cub (of a dog or beast of prey)
جروسة grōsa gross (= 12 dozen)
جرى jarā i (jary) to flow, stream (water); to run; to hurry, rush; to slow (wind); to take place, come to pass, happen, occur; to be under way, be in progress, be going on (work); to befall (ل s.o.), happen (ل to); to be in circulation, circulate, be current; to wend one’s way (الى to), head (على for); to proceed (على in accordance with); to follow (مع s.th.), yield, give way (مع to, e.g., to a desire); to entail (ب s.th.); (with وراء) to run or be after s.th., seek to get s.th.│ مع حديث له جرىhe had a talk with; مجراه جرى (majrāhū) to take the same course as, be analogous to, follow the same way as, proceed or act in the same manner as; الدم مجرى الشيء منه جرى (minhu š-šai’u majrā d-dam) it had become second nature to him; االلسن على جرى (alsun) to circulate, make the rounds (rumor); 121 لسان كل على جرى to be on everyone’s lip; قلمه على جرى (qalamihī) to come to s.o.’s pen (e.g, a poem); على جرى خطة (ḳiṯṯa) to follow a plan; عليه يجرى ما العمل (‘amalu) the way things are handled, what is customary practice; العمل به جرى to be in force, be valid, be commonly observed (law, custom); ب العادة جرت to be customary, be common practice, be a common phenomenon, have gained vogue; على بالعادة جرى to do s.th. customarily, se in the habit of doing s.th.; عادتھم بذلك جرت that was their habit II to
 cause to run│ريقه جرى (rīqahū) to make s.o.’s mouth water III to concur, agree, be in agreement (ه with s.o., فى in s.th.); to keep pace, keep up (ه with s.o.; also intellectually); to be able to follow (ه s.o.); to go (along) (ھ with); to adapt o.s. adjust, conform (ھ to), be guided (ھ by) IV to cause to flow, make flow (ھ s.th.); to cause to run, set running (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to make (ھ s.th.) take place or happen, bring about (ھ s.th.); to carry out, execute, enforce, put into effect, apply (ھ s.th., e.g., rules, regulations); to carry out, perform (ھ an action); to Set going, set in motion (ھ a project), launch (ھ an undertaking); to channel (على or ھ ل s.th. to), bestow, settle (على or ھ ل s.th. upon s.o.); to impose, inflict (ھ على s.th., a penalty, on s.o.)│ تجربة اجرى (tajribatan) to carry out an experiment; تحقيقا اجرى to conduct an investigation; اعانة له اجرى (i‘ānatan) to grant s.o. a subsidy; اجراه مجرى (majrā, with foll. genitive) to treat s.th. in the same manner as, put s.th. on equal footing with
جرى jary course│على جريا jaryan ‘alā in accordance with, according to
جراك min jarāka and min jarā’ika because of you, on your account, for your sake
جراء jarrā’ runner, racer
جراية jirāya pl. -āt daily (food) rations; pay, salary│جراية عيش ‘ēš girāya (eg.) coarse bread
جريان jarayāan flow, flux; course; stream
مجرى majra.. pl. مجار majārin watercourse, stream, rivulet, gully; torrent or flood of water; pipeline; canal, channel; drain, sewer, pl. sewers, sewage system; power line (el.); current (el.); current (of a stream); guide rail (tech.); course (of events), progress, passage│البول مجرى m.
l-baul urethra (anat.); التنفس مجارى m. t- tanaffus respiratory tract (anat.); مجرى الھواء m. l-hawā’ air stream, current of air, draft; مجراه اخذ to take its course; See also جرى I and IV
ماجريات mājarayāt, mājariyāt (pl. of ما جرى) (course of) events, happenings
مجاراة mujārāh keeping up (with foll. genitive: with); conformity (with foll. genitive: with)│ ل مجاراة mujārātan li in conformity with, in accordance with, according to
اجراء ijrā’ pl. -āt performance (of an action); execution; enforcement; pl. measures, steps, proceedings│ اجراءات اتخذ (ittaḳada) to take measures; قانونية اجراءات (qānūnīya) legal step, proceedings at law
جار jārin flowing, streaming, running; circulating; current, present│ الجارى الشھر (šahr) the current month
جارية jāriya pl. –āt, جوار jawārin girl; slave girl; maid, servant; ship, vessel
جز jazza u (jazz) to cut off, clip (ھ s.th.); to shear, shear off (ھ s.th.; esp. the wool of sheep)
jazā’iz  جزائز jizaz, جزز pl. jizza جزة
shorn wool, fleece, slip
جزازة juzāza pl. -āt slip of paper; label, tag
جزاز jazzāz pl. –ūn shearer, woolshearer
مجز mijazz woolshears 122
جزأ jaza’a a and VIII to be content, content
o.s. (ب with) II to divide, part, separate, break up, cut up, partition (ھ s.th.) V to divide, break up, be or become divided; to be separated, be detached, be partitioned off; to be divisible, separable (عن from)
جزء juz’ pl. اجزاء ajzā’ part, portion; constituent, component; fraction; division; section; the 30  part of the Koran (= 2 ḥizb)
جزئى juz’ī partial; minor, trivial, insignificant, unimportant; (jur.) minor, petty; جزئيا juz’īyan partly; جزئيات juz’īyāt details, particulars; trivialities; subordinate partly; divisions, sections (e.g., of a court of justice)│ جزئية مواد (mawādd) petty cases (jur.); جزئية جنح (junaḥ) summary delicts (jur.); جزئية محاكم courts of summary justice; جزئية نيابة (niyāba) parquet of a summary court; جزئية حادثة minor incident; جزئية تسوية (taswiya) part payment; والكليات الجزئيات (kullīyāt) the particular and general aspects, the minor and the major issues
 جزيء juzai’ pl. -āt molecule
اجزائى ajzā’ī pl. -ūn pharmacist, druggist
اجزاجى ajzājī pl. -īya pharmacist, druggist
pl. ajzāḳāna اجزاخانة and ajzā’īya اجزائية
-āt pharmacy, drugstore
تجزئة tajzi’a division; partition; separation; dissociation; breakdown (into classes, categories, etc.); fragmentation│ للتجزئة قابل divisisle; التجزئة قابلية divisibility; التجزئة تاجر retailer, retail merchant
جزدان juzdān, jidān pl. -āt wallet; change purse
جزر jazara u (jazr) to slaughter; to kill, butcher (ھ an animal); -- i u (jazr) to sink, fall, drop, ebb (water)
جزر jazr slaughter; butchering; ebb (of the sea)
جزرة jazra blood sacrifice
جزور jazūr pl. جزر juzur slaughter camel
جزار jazzār pl. ة, -ūn butcher
juzur جزر jazā’ir , جزائر pl. jazīra جزيرة الجزيرة peninsula; j. šibhu شبه جزيرة island│ Mesopotemia; (Northwest) Jazira, Al j. جزيرة العرب Algiers; Algeria; الجزائر
al-‘arab Arabia, the Arabian Peninsula; الخالدات الجزائر (ḳālidāt) the Canary Islands; الخضراء الجزيرة (ḳaḍrā’) Algeciras (seaport in SW Spain)
جزرى jazarī insular; (pl. -ūn) islander
جزائرى jazā’rī pl. -ūn Algerian (adj. and n.); islander
majāzir  مجازر pl. majzar مجزر
slaughterhouse, abattoir; butchery
majāzir  مجازر pl. majzara مجزرة
butchery; massacre, carnage
  جزرjazar (coll.; n. un. ة) carrot(s)
جزع jazi‘a a (jaza‘, جزع juzū‘) to be or become anxious, worried, concerned; to be sad, unhappy (من about); to feel regret (على for s.o.), pity (على s.o.); to mourn (j. for s.o.)
V to break apart, break, snap
جزع jaz‘ onyx
جزع juz’ axle; shaft (techn.)
جزع jaza‘ anxiety, uneasiness, apprehension, concern; anguish, fear; sadness
جزع jazi‘ restless, impatient; anxious, worried, uneasy, apprehensive
جزع jazū‘ and جازع jāzi‘ restless; impatient; anxious, worried, uneasy, apprehensive
مجزع mujazza‘ marbled, veined; variegated, dappled 123
جزف III to act at random, blindly, Indiscriminately, take a chance; to speculate (fin.); to speak vaguely, in general terms; to risk, stake (ب s.th.)│ بنفسه جازف  to risk one’s life; فى به جازف to plunge s.o. into (some adventure)
جزاف juzāf purchase of a certain amount of things (Isl. Law); جزافا juzāfan at random, haphazardly
مجازفة mujāzafa rashness, recklessness, foolhardiness; risk, hazard; adventure, venture
مجازف mujāzif rash, reckless, foolhardy; adventurous; venturesome
  جزل jazūla u to be considerable, abundant, plentiful IV العطاء له اجزل (‘aṯā’) to give generously, openhandedly, liberally to s.o.
VIII to write shorthand
جزل jazl and جزيل jazīl pl. جزال jizāl abundant, plentiful, ample, much; pure, lucid, eloquent (style)│ الرأي جزل of sound, unerring judgment; جزيال شكرا شكره šakarahū šukran jazīlan he thanked him profusely; جزيال شكرا many thanks!
جزل jizla piece, slice
جزالة jazāla profusion, abundance; (rhet.) purity (of style)
مجتزل mujtazil stenographer
  جوزل look up alphabetically
جزدان = juzlānجزالن  
  جزم jawma i (jazm) to cut off, cut short, clip ( ھ s.th.); to judge; to decide. Settle (ھ s.th.); to be positive (ب about), be absolutely certain (ب of s.th.); to assert authoritatively (ب s.th.); to make up one's mind, decide, resolve (على to do s.th.); to impose, make incumbent (ھ على s.th. on
 s.o.); (gram.) to pronounce the final consonant (of a word) without a vowel; to put (ھ a verb) into the apocopate form or the imperative
جزم jazm cutting off, clipping; decision; resolution, resolve; apodictic judgment; (gram.) apocopate form│ الجزم عالمة ‘alāmat al-j. = jazma
جزمة jazma diacritical mark ( ) indicating vowellessness of a final consonant
جازم jāzim decisive; peremptory, definite, definitive, final; firmly convinced, absolutely certain (ب of s.th.); (pl. جوازم jawāzim ) governing the apocopate form (gram.)
مجزوم majzūm cut off. cut short, clipped; decided. settled; (gram.) vowelless (final consonant); in the apocopate form
منجزم munjazim (gram.) in the apocopate form
  جزمة jazma pl. –āt, جزم jizam (pair of) shoes (pair of) boots│ برباط جزمة (bi-ribāṯ) laced soots; لماعة جزمة (lammā‘a) patent-leather shoes
جزمجى gazmagī (eg.) and جزماتى gizamātī (eg.), jazmātī (syr.) pl. -īya shoemaker
جزى jazā i (جزاء iazii') to requite, recompense ( ه s.o., ب or على for), repay (ه to s.o., ب or على s.th.); to reward (ه s.o., ب or على for); to punish (ه s.o., ب or على for); to satisfy (ه s.o.), give satisfaction (ه to s.o.); to compensate, make up (ھ ب for s.th. with or by); to compensate, offset (عن s.th.)│ خيرا ﷲ جزاك (ḳairan) may God bless you for it!; سنمار جزاء جزاه (jazā’a sinimmāra) he returned to him good for evil III to repay, requite (ھ ب s.th. with, ه ب s.o. for), recompense (ه ب s.o. for); to reward (على or ه ب s.o. for); to punish (على or ه ب s.o. for)│ خيرا جزاھم (ḳairan) he invoked God’s reward upon them IV to suffice (ه s.o.), do for s.o. (ه); to take the place, serve instead (عن of), replace (عن s.th.)
جزاء jazā’ requital, repayment; recompense, return; compensation, setoff; 124 amends, reparation; punishment, penalty│ نقدي جزاء (naqdī) fine
جزائى jazā’ī penal
جزية jizya pl. جزى jizan, جزاء jizā’ tax; tribute; head tax on free non-Muslims under Muslim rule
تجزية tajziya reward
مجازاة mujāzāh requital, repayment; punishment
جس jassa u (jass, مجسة majassa) to touch, feel, handle (ھ s.th.); to palpate, examine by touch (ھ s.th.); to test, sound, probe (ھ s.th.); to try to gain information (ھ about), try to find out (ھ s.th.); to spy out (ھ s.th.)│ نبضه جس (nabḍahū) to feel s.o.’s pulse, (fig.) الشيء نبض جس to probe, sound out, try to find out s.th. V to try to gain information (ھ about), try to find out (ھ s.th.); to reconnoiter, scout, explore (ھ s.th.); to be a spy, engage in espionage; to spy, pry, snoop (على on s.o.)│ له تجسس اخبارا (aḳbāran) to gather information for s.o., spy for s.o. VIII to touch, feel, handle (ھ s.th.); to spy out (ھ s.th.)
جس jass: الجس طرى ṯarīy al-j. delicate to the touch, having a tender surface, fresh
spy jawāsīs  جواسيس pl. jāsūs جاسوس
جاسوسة jāsūsa woman spy
جاسوسى jāsūsī of espionage, spy- (in compounds)
جاسوسية jāsūsīya spying, espionage
جوسسة jausasa spying, espionage
مجس majass spot which one touches or feels; sense of touch│ المجس خشن ḳašin al-
m. coarse to the touch, having a rough surface
مجس mijass probe (med.)
تجسس tajassus spying, espionage
جاسئ jāsi’ hard, rough, rugged
جسد II to make corporeal, invest with a body, embody, incarnate (ھ s.th.), give concrete form (ھ to s.th.); to render or represent in corporeal form (ھ s.th.) V to become corporeal, assume concrete form, materialize; to become incarnate (Chr.); to become three-dimensional
 عيد الجسد body│ ajsād اجساد pl. jasad جسد Day Christi Corpus خميس الجسد and al-j. ‘īd (Chr.)
جسدى jasadī bodily, fleshly, carnal
جسدانى jusdānī bodily
تجسد taia.snul materialization; incar· nation (OM.)
مجسد mujassad embodied, corporified
متجسد mutajassid corporeal; incarnate
(Chr)
جسر jasara u to span, cross, traverse (ھ s.th.); (جسارة jasāra, جسور jusūr) to venture, risk (على s.th.), have the courage (على to do s.th.) II to build a dam or dike; to embolden, encourage (ھ s.o., على to do s.th.) VI to dare, venture, risk (على s.th.), have the audacity (على to do s.th.); to be sold, forward, insolent, impudent (على with s.o.) VIII to span, cross, traverse (ھ s.th.)
جسر jisr pl. اجسر ajsur, جسور jusūr bridge; dam, dike, embankment, levee; -- (pl. جسورة jusūra) beam, girder; axle, axletree│ متحرك جسر (muḥarrik) movable bridge; معلق جسر (mu‘allaq) suspension bridge; عائم جسر pontoon bridge, floating bridge
جسور jasār sold, daring; forward, insolent, impudent
جسارة jasāra boldness, recklessness, intrepidity; forwardness, insolence
تجاسر tajāsur boldness, recklessness, intrepidity; forwardness, insolence
متجاسر mutajāsir bold, daring; forward, insolent, impudent 125
جصطن see جسطن
جسم jasuma u (جسامة jasāma) to be great. Big, large. bulky. huge. immense II to make corporeal. invest with a body (ھ s.th.), give (ھ s.th.) shape or form; to materialize (ھ s.th.); to cause to stand out. bring out ( ھ s.th.); to enlarge, magnify (ھ s.th.; e.g., microscope); to make big, bulky, huge (ھ s.th.); to play up, exaggerate (ھ s.th.) V to become corporeal, become embodied; to materialize; to assume a form, take shape, become tangible or concrete; to be
materialized; to become big, large, huge, increase in volume, grow in size
جسم pl. اجسام ajsām, جسوم jusūm body (also O of an automobile); substance, matter; mass; form, shape
جسمى iiaa1 bodily, physical; substantial, material
جسيم jasīm pl. جسام great, big, large; voluminous, bulky, huge; vast, immense; stout, corpulent; weighty, most significant, momentous, prodigious
جسيم jusaim pl. -āt particle (phys.); corpuscle (biol.)
اجسم ajsam  more voluminous, larger; stouter, more corpulent
جسم jasāma size, volume; stoutness, corpulence
جسمان jusmān body, mass
جسمانى jusmānī bodily, physical. Corporal│الجسمانى التأديب corporal punishment
تجسيم tajsīm embodiment; relief; enlargement, magnification, magnifying power
جسم mujassam bodily, corporeal; (math.) body; three-dimensional; tangible, material, concrete; raised, relieflike, standing out in relief (e.g., مجسمة خريطة relief map); relief; enlarged. Magnified│ مجسم فلم (film) three-dimensional (stereoscopic) film, 3-D motion picture
جسمانية jasmānīya  Gethseman
جسو) جسا) jasā u to become hard, solid
جش jašša u (jašš) to grind, crush, bruise, grate (ھ s.th.)
جش jušša hoarseness, huskiness, raucity (of the voice)
جشيش jašīš ground, grated, crushed
اجش ajašš , f. جشاء jaššā’  hoarse, husky, raucous (voice)
جشأ II and V to belch, burp
جشاء jušā’ and جشأة jaš’a belch(ing), burp(ing)
جشار jušār livestock
 جشع jaši‘a a (jaša‘) and V to be covetous, greedy
جشع jaša‘ greed, avidity, inordinate desire
جشع jaši‘ greedy, covetous
جشم jašāma a (jašm, جشامة jašāma) to take upon o.s. (ھ some hardship) II to make (ه s.o.) suffer or undergo (ھ s.th.); to impose (ه ھ on s.o. s.th. difficult), burden (ه ھ s.o. with s.th.) V to take upon o.s., suffer, undergo (ھ s.th., e.g., hardships)
جشنى (eg., cf. ششنى šišnī) sample, specimen; sampling
جص II to plaster, whitewash (ھ s.th.)
جص jiṣṣ gypsum; plaster of Paris
جصطن II tajaṣṯana to lounge, stretch lazily, loll
جعة ji‘a beer
جعب II to corrugate (ھ s.th.)
جعبة ja‘ba pl. جعاب ji‘āb quiver; tube, pipe; gun barrel; o cartridge pouch (Syr.)│ اخبار جعبة
j. aḳbār town gossip (person) 126
جعجع ja‘ja‘a (جعجع ja‘ja‘a) to clamor, roar, shout; to clatter, clap; to bluster, explode in anger
جعجعة ja‘ja‘a hubbub, rumpus, clamor, roar; creak, clapping noise (of a mill wheel); bluster
جعجاع ja‘jā‘ clamorous, boisterous, noisy; bawler, loud-mouthed person
جعد ja‘uda a (جعودة ju‘ūda, جعادة ja‘āda) and V to become curly, frizzed, kinky, curl (hair); to be wavy; to be creased; to be wrinkled II to curl, frizz (ھ s.th.; the hair); to wave (ھ s.th.; the hair); to crease, pleat, plait (ھ cloth); to wrinkle (ھ the skin)
جعد ja‘d (or اليد جعد j. al-yad, الكف جعد j. al-kaff) stingy, niggardly, tightfisted
جعدة ja‘da curl, lock, ringlet
جعدى ja‘dī and اجعد aj‘ad  curly
جعيدى gə‘īdī (eg.) bum, loafer, good-for- nothing
تجاعيد tajā‘īd  wrinkles, lines (of the face)
تجعدات taja‘‘udāt wrinkles
مجعد muja‘‘ad curled, frizzed; wavy; furrowed, creased; wrinkled
متجعد mutaja‘‘id curled, frizzed; wavy; furrowed, creased; wrinkled
جعدنة ja‘dana idle talk, gossip (leb.)
جعر ja‘ara a (ja‘r) to drop its manure (animal)
جعران ابو abū ji‘rān  scarabaeus; dung beetle
جعفر ja‘far little river, creek
جعل ja‘ala a (ja‘l) to make (ھ s.th.); to put, place, lay (ھ s.th.); to create (ھ s.th.); to effect, bring about (ھ s.th.); to make (ھ ھ s.th. a rule, a principle, or the like, ه ه s.o., e.g., leader, king, etc.), appoint (ه ه s.o. to an office, rank, or the like); to fix, set (ھ ھ a sum, a price, at); to think, deem, believe (ه ب or ه ه s.o. to be …, ھ ھ s.th. to be ...), take (ه ب or ه ه s.o. for, ھ ھ s.th. for); to represent (ھ s.th., صورة فى as, or in the form of, s.th. else); to appoint, settle (ھ ل s.th. for s.o., in s.o.’s favor); to give, grant, concede (ھ ل s.th., an advantage, to s.o.), put s.o. (ل) in the way of s.th. (ھ); to attribute (ل ھ to s.o. s.th.), maintain that s.th. (ھ) belong. to s.o. (ل); to entrust (الى ھ s.th. to s.o.); to put, get (ه s.o., ھ s.th., into a specific state or condition); (with foll. imperf.) to begin to, set out to│جعله يفعل to induce s.o. to do; to make s.o. do s.th. (in a narrative); بمننزلة جعله (bi- manzilati) to place s.o. on equal footing with; يده متناول فى جعله (fī mutanāwali yadihī) to bring or put s.th. within s.o.’s reach III to seek to bribe, try to win (ه ب
s.o. with s.th.)
جعل ju‘l pl. اجعال aj‘āl pay, wages; piece wages; reward, prize
جعلى ju‘līi: جعلى اتفاق (ittifāq) piece-work contract
جعل ju‘al pl. جعالن ji‘lān dung beetle; scarabaeus
جعالة ji‘āla, ja‘āla, ju‘āla pl. جعائل ja‘āil  pay, wages; allowance; reward, prize: bribe
jugrāfīya جغرافية and jugrāfiyā جغرافيا (ṯabī‘īya) جغرافية طبيعيةgeography│ geography physical
جغرافي jugrāfī geographical; geographer
 جف jaffa (1  pers. perf. jafaftu) i (جفاف jafāf, جفوف jufūf) to dry, become dry; to dry out II to dry, make dry (ھ s.th.)
جفاف jafāf dryness; desiccation; drying up; dullness
تجفافtajfāf pl. تجافيف tajāfīf  protective armor
تجفيف tajfīf drying; desiccation; dehydration; drainage 127
جاف jāff dry│ جاف حبر قلم (qalam ḥibr) ball-point pen
مجفف mujaffaf dried, desiccated, dehydrated; مجففات dehydrated foods
جفاء jufā’ useless, vain, futile│ جفاء ذھب dahaba jufā’an to be in vain, be of no avail, pass uselessly
جفت jift, چفت čift (pronounced šift; eg.) pincers, tweezers; metal clamp│ شريان جفت j. šaryān arterial clamps
چفتشى (pronounced šiftišī; eg.) filigree
جفتلك jiftlik farm, country estate; government land (Pal.)
جفر jafr, الجفر علم ‘ilm al-j. divination, fortunetelling
جفرة jufra pl. جفر jufar pit, hole
جفل jafala i u (jafl, جفول jufūl) and IV to start, jump with fright; to shy (horse) II to start, rouse (ھ s.th., .s.o.); to scare away (ه s.o.)
جفل jafl and جفول jufūl fright, alarm; shying
جفتلك = eg.) šiflik; (pronounced چفلك eyelid ajfān اجفان jufūn, جفون pl. جفن
jafanāt جفنات jifān, جفان pl. jafna جفنة
bowl; grapsvine
(جفا (جفو jafā u (jafw, جفاء jafā’) to be rough, coarse; to treat (ه s.o.) roughly, harshly; to turn away (. from), shun, avoid, flee (ه s.o.) III to treat (ه s.o.) roughly, rudely, harshly; to be cruel (ه to s.o.); to be cross ( ه with s.o.); to elude, flee (ه s.o.; slumber); to offend (ھ against good taste, one’s sense of honor, or the like) VI to withdraw (عن from), shun, avoid (ه s.o.); to loathe ( عن s.o., s.th.), have an aversion (عن to); to display rude manners, act the ruffian
جفو jafw roughness, harshness
جفوة jafwa roughness; estrangement, alienation; disagreement, dissension, quarrel
جفاء jafā’ roughness; harshness; sternness; antipathy, aversion, distaste, loathing; estrangement, alienation
اجفى ajfā refraining even more (ل from), more averse (ل to s.th.)
جاف jāfin pl. جفاة jufāh harsh, rough, coarse; brutish, uncouth, rude
جاكتة look up alphabetically
جكر III (syr.) to tease (ه s.o.)
 جل jalla i (جالل jalāl) to be great, lofty, exalted, illustrious, sublime; to be too great (عن for), be beyond s.th. (عن), be far above s.th. (الحصر عن جل │(عن(‘an il-ḥaṣr) to be innumerable II to honor, dignify, exalt (ه s.o.); to cover (ھ s.th., esp. the ground, as snow, plants, etc.); to envelop, wrap, drape, clothe; to border, edge (ھ s.th., ب with) IV to honor, dignify, revere, venerate, esteem highly, exalt (ه s.o.); to deem too high, too exalted (عن for s.th.), consider far beyond s.th. (عن) VI to deem
o.s. far above s.th. (عن) X to be great, exalted, sublime
جل great, outstanding; bulky
جل jull major portion, bulk, majority, main part│جله julluhū most of it; االمة جل j. al-umma the majority of the people; ما جل فيه its main contents; انه يقال ما وجل (jullu) that much, at least, can be said that ...
جلل jalal important, significant, momentous, weighty
جلى jullā pl. جلل julal matter of great importance, momentous undertaking, great feat, exploit
جلة julla, jilla droppings, dung (of animals); julla pl. جلل julal (cannon) ban; bomb 128
جلة julla attire, clothing│ الجبروتية الجلة الكھنوتية))  (ḥabrawīya, kahnūtīya) Episcopal (sacerdotal) vestments (Chr.)
جليل jalīl pl. اجالء ajillā’ , اجلة ajilla, جالئل jalā’il  great, important, significant, weighty, momentous; lofty, exalted,
 sublime; revered, honorable, venerable; glorious, splendid
جالل jalāl loftiness, sublimity, augustness; splendor, glory
جاللة jalāla loftiness, sublimity, augustness; majeoty│ الجاللة (صاحبة) صاحب His (Her) Majesty, الملك جاللة j. al-malik His Majesty, the King
اجل ajall  greater; more sublime; more splendid
مجلة majalla pl. -āt periodical; review, magazine│ اسبوعية مجلة (usbū‘īya) weekly magazine; شھرية مجلة (šahrīya) monthly publication; ب خاصة مجلة (ḳāṣṣa) professional journal for a. ; االحكام مجلة lawbook, code; القوانين مجلة do.
تجلة tajilla and اجالل ijlāl honor, distinction; esteem, deference, respect; reverence
  جل jull rose
جالب julāb, jullāb rose water; julep
جالتين (Fr. gélatine) želātīn jelly
جالسية (Fr. glacé) glasēh (eg.) kid leather
 جلب jalaba i u (jalb) to attract (ھ s.th.); to fetch, get, bring (ھ s.th., ل to s.o.); to import (ھ goods); to bring about (ھ a state, condition); to bring (ھ harm, shame, etc., على upon s.o.); to gain, win, obtain (ھ s.th.); to earn (ھ s.th.); (جلوب julūb) to scar over, heal (wound) II to shout, clamor; to be noisy, boisterous IV to earn, gain, acquire (ھ s.th.); = II; VII pass. of I VIII to procure, bring, fetch, get (ھ s.th.); to draw (ھ on s.th.); to import (ھ goods) X to import (ھ goods); to fetch, summon, call in (ه s.o.); to attract, draw (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to seek to attract or win (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to get, procure (ھ s.th.)
جلب jalb bringing, fetching; procurement; acquisition; importation, import; causation, bringing on, bringing about
جلب jalab imported; foreign
جلب jalab and جلبة jalaba clamor; uproar, tumult, turmoil
جلبة julba scar
جليب jalīb imported, foreign; (pl. جلبى
jalbā, جلباء julabā’ ) foreign slave
جالب jallāb attractive, captivating; importer, trader; see also alphabetically│ العبيد جالب slave trader
جالبية gallābīya (eg.) pl. -at, جالليب galālīb  galabia, a loose, shirtlike garment, the common dreao of the male population in Egypt
جلبب under below جلباب
جلب ajlab  more attractive, more captivating
مجلبة majlaba pl. مجالب majālib  causative factor, motive, reason, cause, occasion
استجالب istijlāb procurement, acquisition; importation, import; supply; attraction│ السائحين استجالب promotion of tourist traffic
جالب jālib causative factor, motive, reason, cause, occasion
  جالب julāb, jullāb rose water; julep
  جلبا jalabā jalap (bot.)
جلبب II tajalbaba to clothe o.s. (ب with), be clothed, be clad (ب in a garment, also fig.)
جلباب jilbāb pl. جالبيب jalābīb  garment, dress, gown; woman's dress
جلبان julubbān chickling vetch, grass pea (Lathyrus sativua)
  جلجل jaljala to reverberate; to resound, ring out; to rattle; to shake (ھ s.th.)
جلجل juljul pl. جالجل jalājil  (little) bell, sleigh bell; cowbell; jingle
جلجلة jaljala sound of a bell; loud, shrill sound
مجلجل mujaljil shrill, piercing; ringing, resounding, reverberant
Golgotha al-j. jabal جبل الجلجلة juljula, جلجلة  
  جلجالنjuljulān, jiljilān sesame
جلح jaliḥa a (jalaḥ) to be or become bald
julḥ جلح pl. jalḥā’ , جلحاء f. ajlaḥ , اجلح
bald-headed, bald
 جلخ jalaḳa a and II to sharpen (ھ s.th.); to whet, hone (ھ a knife), strop (ھ a razor); to stretch, extend, roll out (ھ metal)
جلخ jalḳ grindstone, whetetone, hone
جلد jalada i (jald) to whip, flog, lash (ه s.o.); -- jalida a to be frozen, freeze; -- jaluda u to be tough, hardy, undismayed, steadfast, patient II to bind (ھ a book); (to cause) to freeze (ھ s.th.) III to fight (ه s.o.) IV to freeze; to be frozen, be covered with ice V to take heart; to show o.s. tough, hardy, robust; to resign o.s. to patience; to bear, suffer VI to engage in a sword fight
جلد jald flogging; -- (pl. اجالد ajlād) staunch, steadfast; strong, sturdy
جلد jild pl. جلود julūd, اجالد ajlād skin, hide; leather│ سختيان جلد (suḳtiyān) morocco; لماع جلد (lammā‘) patent leather
جلدة jilda skin, hide; piece of leather; race│ جلدتنا ابن ibn jildatinā our countryman, our fellow tribesman, pl. بنو جلدتنا banū j.
جلدى jildī dermal, cutaneous, skin (adj.)│ جلدية امراض skin diseases
جليدة julaida pl. -āt membrane, pellicle; O film (phot.)
جلد jalad enduranos; suffering; patience; firmament
جلدة jalda lash, stroke with a whip
جليد jalīd pl. جلداء juladā’  staunch, steadfast; strong, sturdy
جليد jalīd ice│ جليد جبل jabal j. iceberg;
floe ice (qiṯ‘a) قطعة من الجليد
جليدى jalīdī icy, ice-covered, glacial, ice (adj.); snow-covered│ الجليدى العصر (‘aṣr) the Ice Age
جلود jalūd long-suffering, patient
جالد jallād pl. -ūn leather merchant; executioner, hangman
جالدة jalāda and جلودة julūda endurance, patience
مجلدة mijlada whip, lash, scourge تجليد tajlīd freezing; bookbinding جالد jilād fight, battle (against) تجلد tajallud endurance, patience
al-kutub m. مجلد الكتب mujallid: مجلد
bookbinder
مجلد mujallad frozen, icy, ice-covered; bound (book); (pl. -āt) volume (book)
مجالد mujālid pl. -ūn gladiator
متجلد mutajallid patient
جلمز jillauz (coll.; n. un. ة) hazelnut; hazel
جلس jalasa i (جلوس julūs) to sit down (الى with s.o., at a tabl., etc., على on a chair); to sit ( الى with s.o., at a table, على on a chair)│ الرسام الى جلس (rassām) to sit for a painter III to sit (ه with s.o., next to s.o., in s.o.’s company); to keep s.o. (ه) company IV to ask to sit down, make sit down, eeat (ه s.o.)
جلسة jalsa pl. -āt seat (in an auditorium); session (of parliament, of a committee, 130 of a court, etc.); party, gathering, meeting│جلسة عقد ‘aqada jasatan to convene a session; عامة جلسة (‘āmma) plenary session
جلسة jilsa manner of sitting
جليس pl. جلساء julasā’  participant in a social gathering; table companion: one with whom one sits together; جليسه the man who was at the party with him
جليسة  jalīsa lady companion; fem. of
جليس
جلوس julūs sitting: sitting down; accession to the throne; pl. of جالس sitting
مجلس majlis pl. مجالس majālis  seat; session room, conference room; party, gathering, meeting; social gathering: session, sitting; council meeting; council; concilium; collegium, college: board, committee, commission; administrative board; court, tribunal│مجلسه فى in s.o.’s presence, in s.o.’s company; التأديب مجلس and تأديبى مجلس disciplinary board; مجلس تأسيسى constituent assembly; آفاقى مجلس regional court (tribunal régional; Tun.); األمة مجلس m. al-umma parliament (Ir.); األمن مجلس m. al-amn the Security Council; البلدية مجلس m. al-baladīya and بلدى مجلس (baladī) local council, municipal council; الحرب مجلس m. al-ḥarb war council; مجلس حسبى (ḥasbī) probate court (for Muslim; Eg.); مختلط مجلس (muḳtaliṯ) mixed court (eg.); الدفاع مجلس defense council; مجلس
 االدارة m. al-idāra administrative board, committee of management, directorate; board of directors (of a corporation or bank); المديرية مجلس m. al-mudīrīya provincial council, provincial parliament (Eg.); الدولة مجلس m. ad-daula Supreme Administrative Court (Eg.); روحى مجلس (rūḥī) religious court, clerical court (of the Coptic Church); الدولة شورى مجلس m. šūrā
d-daula council of state; الشيوخ مجلس council of elders: Senate (Eg.); عدلى مجلس (‘adlī) court, tribunal (Syr.); (عسكرى or) عرفى مجلس (‘urfī, ‘askarī) court-martial; األمم عصبة مجلس m. ‘uṣbat al-umam Council of the League of Nations; العموم مجلس the House of Commons; األعيان مجلس m. al- a‘yān senate (Ir., Jord.); االقتراع مجلس draft board, recruiting commission (mil.); مجلس قروى (qarawī) local council; اقتصادى مجلس (iqtiṣādī) economic council: قومى مجلس (qaumī) national assembly; الثورة قيادة مجلس
m. qiyādat at-taura Supreme Revolutionary Tribunal (Eg.): الكبير المجلس and االكبر المجلس (akbar) the Grand Council (= le Grand Conseil; Tun.); اللوردين مجلس the House of Lords: النواب مجلس m. an- nuwwāb lower house, chamber of deputies; نيابى مجلس (niyābī) parliament; الجھة مجلس m. al-jiha approx.: provincial council (= conseil de région; Tun.); مجلس الوزراء m. al-wuzarā’ cabinet, council of ministers
مجالسة mujālasa social intercourse
جالس jālis pl. جلوس julūs, جالس jullās sitting; pl. جالس participants in a social gathering
جلط jalaṯa i (jalṯ) to chafe, gall, abrade (ھ the skin); to shave (الرأس ar-ra’sa the head
جلطة دموية clot│ lump, julṯa جلطة
(damawīya) blood clot, thrombus
جلف jilf pl. اجالف ajlāf boorish, rude, uncivil جلفط jalfaṯa (جلفطة jalfaṯa) to calk (ھ a ship) جلفن galfana (eg.) to galvanize
جلفنة galfana galvanization
مجلفن mugalfan galvanized
yokel, (qarawīya) جالقة قروية jalāqa: جالقة bumpkin
جلم jalama i (jalm) to clip, shear off (ھ s.th.)
جلم jalam pl. اجالم ajlām shears
جلمبو ابو abū galambū (eg.) a variety of crab
جلمد II tajalmada to be petrified
جلمود and jalāmid  جالمد pl. jalmad جلمد
julmūd pl. جالميد jalāmīd  rook, bolder
جلنار jullanār pomegranate blossom
(جلو and جال (جلى jalā u to clean, polish ( ھ s.th.); to clear (ھ the view); to make clear, make plain, clarity, clear up (ھ s.th.), throw light on (ھ), to reveal, unveil, disclose (ھ s.th.), to dislodge, oust, remove (ھ عن or ه s.o. or s.th. from), to shine, be brilliant, distinguish o.s. (فى in s.th.); to be or become clear, evident, manifest; to pull out, move out (عن of a place), go away, depart (عن from a place), leave, quit, evacuate (عن a place); -- جلى jalā i to polish, burnish (ھ s.th.) II to reveal, disclose, bring to light (عن or ھ s.th.); to show, represent (ه s.o., ھ s.th.), IV to remove, dislodge, oust, drive away ( ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to evacuate (ه  s.o. from); to move away, go away (عن from a place), leave (عن a place) V to become clear, evident, manifest; to reveal itself, be revealed, to appear, show, come to light, come out, manifest itself, to be manifested, be expressed, find expression VII to be clean or cleaned, be polished, be burnished, to be removed, be dislodged, be ousted; to move away (عن from a place), vacate, evacuate (عن a place), to be dispelled, vanish, go away, pass (crisis, difficulty, etc.), to disappear, to reveal itself, be revealed, be disclosed; to be unveiled (bride), to become manifest, manifest itself; to become clear or plain; to clear up and reveal (عن s.th.), to lead, come (عن to), end (عن in), to result (عن in)│األمر عنه ينجلى ما the outcome of the matter, what will come of it VIII to reveal, disclose (ھ s.th.), to regard (ھ s.th.), look at (ھ) X to seek to clarify (ھ s.th.), to clarify, clear up (ھ s.th.), throw light (ھ on); to uncover, unearth, bring to light, find out, discover, detect (ھ s.th.)
جال ابن ibn jalā a famous, well-known man, a celebrity
 جلى jalīy clear, plain, evident, patent, manifest, obvious, conspicuous; جليا jalīyan obviously, evidently
جلية jalīya pl. جاليا jalāyā sure thing, plain fact│األمر جلية jalīyat al-amr the true state of the affair
اجلى ajlā clearer, more obvious, more distinct
جلوى jalwā unveiling (of the bride)│ليلة الجلوة lailat al-j. wedding night
جالء jalā’ clarification, elucidation; clarity, clearness, plainness, distinctness; departure, (e)migration (عن from), evacuation (عن of an area; mil.); بجالء clearly, plainly
جليان jalayān vision, revelation, apocalypse (Chr.)
مجال majālin (pl. of مجلى majlan) manifestations
تجلية tajliya: االھية تجلية (ilāhīya) divine revelation; theophany (Chr.)
تجل tajallin revelation, manifestation; Transfiguration (of Christ)│التجلى عيد ‘īd at-t. Transfiguration Day (Chr.)
اجتالء ijtilā’ contemplation
استجالء istijlā’ clarification, elucidation
جالية jāliya pl. -āt, جوال jawālin colony (of foreigners); colony of emigrants
المجلى al-mujallī the winner (in a race)
متجل mutajallin obvious, evident, manifest, patent
جلون galōn pl. -āt gallon (eg.) مجلون mugalwan galvanized (eg.) جلى jullā see   جل
جليوتين gilyotīn guillotine (eg.)
  م ج abbreviation of مصرى جنيه Egyptian pound
  جم jamma i u (jamm) to gather; to collect one’s thoughts, concentrate; to rest II and V to grow luxuriantly (plants) X to gather; to collect one’s thoughts, concentrate; to rest, relax, seek recreation (من from); to be covered with luxuriant vegetation (ground)
جم jamm abundant, plentiful; much, a great deal of; many, numerous; manifold,
multiple; crowd, group of people│األثر جم
j. al-atar effective, efficacious; جما حبا احبه (aḥabbahū ḥubban) to be more than fond of; جمة فوائد numerous advantages, ample benefits; غفير جم large crowd, throng
جمام jamām rest, relaxation, recreation, gathering of new strength
مجم majamm place where s.th. gathers or flows together│ومستجمعه الرأي ھذا مجم (mustajma‘uhū) what this opinion amounts to
تجميم tagmīm (eg.) bobbed hairdo (of women)
استجماتم istijmām collectedness; concentration; attentiveness, attentive reverence; rest, relaxation, recreation
جنباز، جنبازى see جمباز، جنبازى
جمبرى (from It. gambero) gambarī, جمرى
gammarī (eg.) shrimp (zool.)
  جمجم jamjama (جمجمة jamjama), الكالم جمجم (kalāma) and II tajamjama to articulate indistinctly, stammer; to express o.s. poorly, speak incoherently; to mumble
  جمجمة jumjuma pl. جماجم jamājim  skull, cranium
جمجمى jumjumī cranial
جمح jamaḥa a (jamḥ, جماح jimāḥ, جموح jumūḥ to holt (horse); to he refractory, unruly, recalcitrant; to be defiant; to be capricious, whimsical; to run out on her husband, run away from home (wife)
جماح jimāḥ recalcitrance, defiance; willfulness
جموح jumūḥ recalcitrance, defiance; willfulness
جموح jamūḥ headstrong, defiant, unruly, ungovernable
جامح jāmiḥ headstrong, defiant, unruly; indomitable, untamable
  جمد jamada u, jamuda u (jamd, جمود jumūd) to freeze; to congeal, harden, stiffen, be or become hard or solid, solidify; to coagulate, clot (blood); to be rigid, inflexible (in one’s thinking); to stagnate; to be apathetic, indolent, dull, indifferent│ على نفسه جمدت to be indifferent toward, put up with, acquiesce in; يده جمدت (yaduhū) to
 be niggardly, tightfisted II to freeze, frost, congeal (ھ s.th.); to solidify, coagulate, harden, stiffen (ھ s.th.); to curdle (ھ s.th.); to freeze (ھ assets V to freeze, become frozen, turn into ice, freeze up. become icebound; to freeze to death; to congeal; to solidify; to harden, set (e.g., cement); to coagulate, clot (blood) VII to freeze up, become icebound; to freeze, become frozen, turn to ice
جمد jamd freezing; congelation, solidification, coagulation│الجمد درجة darajat al-j. freezing point
جمد jamad ice
جماد jamād pl. -āt a solid; inorganic body; mineral; inanimate body, inanimate being; O neuter (gram.)
جمود jumūd frozen state; solid, compact state, compactness, solidity; rigor, rigidity, stiffness; inorganic state; hardening, induration; hardness, inflexibility; deadlock, standstill; inertia, inaction, inactivity; lethargy, apathy, passivity, indifference
جمودة jumūda solidity, hardness
تجميد tajmīd solidification, hardening; consolidation; reinforcement (of a foundation)│االموال تجميد t. al-amwāl freezing of assets
تجمد tajammud freezing; frost; congelation; solidification; coagulation
انجماد injimād freezing up or over, icing up; ice formation
جامد jāmid hard, solid; stiff; rigid; motionless; inanimate, inorganic; (gram.) defective; dry. dull (book, and the like); impervious to progress to innovation, ossified, ultraconservative; pl. جوامد jawāmid  inanimate things, inorganic matter, minerals
متجمد mutajammid frozen, icy; stiff, congealed; coagulated
منجمد munjamid frozen, icy, ice (adj.); arctic│المنجمد المحيط (muḥīṯ) the Arctic Ocean
  جمادىjumādā name of the fifth and sixth months of the Muslim year (االولى جمادى j.
al-ūlā Jumada I and اآلخرة جمادى j. al-āḳira
Jumada II)
جمر II to roast (ھ meat) VIII to bum incense
جمر jamr embers, live coal│ احر على كان جمر من (aḥarra) to be on tenter-hooks; to be in greatest suspense, be dying with curiosity
جمرة jamra (n. un. of جمر) live coal; firebrand, smoldering embers; rankling resentment; (pl. -āt) carbuncle (med.)│O الخبيثة الجمرة anthrax
جمار jummār palm pith, palm core (edible tuber growing at the upper end of the palm trunk)
majāmir  مجامر pl. mijmara مجمرة
brazier; censer
جمبرى see جمرى  
جمرك (eg.) gumruk pl. جمرك gamārik  customs; customhouse│الجمرك رسم rasm al-g. customs duty, tariff
جمركى gumrukī customs, tariff (used attributively)│ جمركى اتحاد (ittih□ād) customs union
مجمرك mugamrak duty paid
جميز jummaiz (coll.; n. un. ة) sycamore (Ficus sycomorus; bot.)
جاموس look up alphabetically
جمش jamaša i u (jamš) to unhair (ھ s.th.) II to make love, caress, pet
جمع jama‘a a (jam‘) to gather (ھ s.th.); to collect (ھ e.g., money); to unite, combine, bring together (parts into a whole); to put together. join (ھ things); to set, compose ( ھ type; typ.); to compile (ھ a book); to summarize. sum up (ھ s.th.) to rally, round up (ھم people); to pile up, amass accumulate (ھ s.th.); to assemble (ھم several persons); to convoke, convene, call (ھ a meeting); to add (ھ numbers), add up (ھ a column); (gram.) to make plural, pluralize (ھ a word); to unite, link, bring together (بين several things or persons); to combine (و – بين e.g., both strength and courage); to contain, hold, comprise (ھ s.th.)│الشيء اطراف جمع (aṯrāfa) to summarize, sum up s.th.; to give a survey of s.th.; اطرافھا من البراعة جمع (barā‘ata) to be very efficient, do an
 excellent job, do superlatively good work; القطيع شمل جمع (šamla l-q.) to round up the herd; صفحاتھا بين الكتاب يجمع (ṣafaḥātihā) the book contains, lists …; بيوت على بيت يجمع (yujma‘u) the plural of bait is buyūt II to pile up, amass, accumulate (ھ s.th.); to rally, round up (ھ s.th., ھم s.o.); to assemble (ھ the parts of a 134 machine) III to have sexual intercourse (ھا with a woman) IV to agree (على on s.th., to do s.th.); to be agreed (على on); to decide unanimously (على on), resolve (على to do s.th.)│امرھم اجمعوا (amrahum) they came to terms, they made a joint decision V to gather; to assemble, congregate; to rally, band together, flock together (people); to pile up; to accumulate; to gather into a mass, agglomerate; to cluster; to coagulate VIII to be close together; to come together, meet, join; to unite, combine (ب with); to assemble, meet, convene (an organization, a committee, etc.); to be or get together, have a meeting, interview or conference, hold talks (مع ب، with s.o.), meet (مع ب، s.o.; to concur (على in), agree, be agreed (على on s.th.) X to gather, collect (ھ s.th.; also قواه quwāhu one’s strength, افكاره afkārahū one’s thoughts); to summarize, sum up (ھ s.th.); to possess, combine (ھ s.th.)
جمع jam’ gathering; collection; combination; connection, coupling, joining; accumulation; (arith.) addition; union, merger, aggregation, integration ( بين of) holding together (بين of divergent, separate things); (pl. جموع jumū‘) gathering, crowd, throng; gang, troop; (gram.) plural│ الشمل جمع j. aš-šaml union, integration; التكسير جمع the broken (= internal) plural, السالم الجمع the regular (= external) plural; الجمع اسم ism al-j. collective noun (gram.); اليد جمع j. al-yad fist
جمع jum‘, الكف جمع j. al-kaff, اليد جمع j. al- yad fist, clenched hand│ يديه بجمع with clenched fists
week; -āt juma‘, جمع pl. jum‘a جمعة جمعة Friday; al-j. yaum يوم الجمعة Friday│ يوم and الجمعة العظيمة Week; Passion اآلالم (Chr.) Friday Good  الجمعة الحزينة
جمعية jam‘iya pl. -āt club, association, society; corporation, organization; 135
assembly│األمم جمعية j. al-umam League of Nations; خيرية جمعية (ḳairīya) charitable organization; االسعاف جمعية j. al-is‘āf approx.: civil ambulance service; جمعية (tašrī‘īya) legislative assembly; جمعية عمومية ‘umūmīya) and عامة جمعية (‘āmma) general assembly; general meeting; plenum, plenary session; تعاونية جمعية (ta‘āwunīya) cooperative
جميع jamī‘ (with foll. genitive) total; whole, entire; all; entirety; e.g., الناس جميع all men, all mankind; الجميع all people, everybody; the public at large; جميعا jamī‘an in a body, altogether, one and all, all of them; entirely, wholly, totally
جمع ajma‘  pl. -ūn, f. جمعاء jam‘ā’ , pl. جمع juma‘  entire, whole, all`│االسالمى العالم اجمع (ajma‘a) the entire Islamic world; الدار جمعاء (jam‘ā’a) the whole house; باجمعه bi- ajma‘ihī in its entirety, to its full extent, completely, altogether; باجمعھم جاؤوا all of them came
جماع jummā‘ aggregate; total, total amount
O كھربائى جماع jammā‘ kahrabā‘ī; storage battery
جماعة jamā‘a pl. -āt group (of people); band, gang, party, troop; community; squad (military unit; Eg. 1939)│ جماعات وافرادا jamā‘ātin wa-afrādan in groups and individually
جماعى jamā‘ī collective (as opposed to
فردى fardī individual)
مجمع majma‘ pl. مجامع majāmi‘  place where two or more things meet, place or point of union, junction; meeting, congregation, convention, assembly; (also علمى مجمع m. ‘ilmī) academy (scientific); college (e.g., of ecclesiastical dignitaries); synod│بلدى مجمع (baladī) provincial synod (Chr.); اكليركى مجمع (iklīrīkī) clerical synod (of the Coptic Church); القلوب بمجامع اخذ to win or captivate the hearts; 135 عينيه بمجامع bi-m. ‘ainaihi (to look at s.o.) with complete concentration, intently
مجمعى majma‘ī academy member, academician
تجمي tajmī‘ assembly, assemblage (of the parts of machinery)
 جماع jimā‘ sexual intercourse; s.th. comprising or involving another thing or a number of things│ االثم جماع الخمرal-ḳamr
j. al-itm wine involves sin, wine
اجماع ijmā‘ agreement, unanimity (also الرأي اجماع); unanimous resolution (على to do s.th.); (Isl. Law) consensus (of the authorities in a legal question; one of the four uṣūl of Islamic Law)│ باالجماع unanimously
اجماعى ijmā‘ī based on general agreement, unanimous; collective, universal
تجمع tajammu‘ pl. -āt coming together, meeting; gathering; troop concentration; crowd, throng, mob; agglomeration; O agglutination (chem.-med.)
اجتماع ijtimā‘ pl. -āt meeting (ب with s.o.; of a corporate body; of parliament); get-together, gathering, assembly; reunion; rally; convention; conjunction, constellation (astron.); confluence (of rivers); life in a social group, community life, social life; االجتماع human society│ الطرق اجتماع ijtimā‘ aṯ-ṯuruq crossroads, intersection, junction; االجتماع علم ‘ilm al- ijt. sociology; االجتماع علماء sociologists
(used group community, ijtimā‘ī اجتماعى socialist(ic); social; attributively); وزارة الشؤون االجتماعيةsociological│ الحالة االجتماعية affairs; social for ministry (ḳidma) الخدمة االجتماعية status; personal المساواة االجتماعية work; social service, social الھيئة االجتماعية equality; social (musāwāh) society human (hai’a)
اجتماعية ijtimā‘īya socialism
جامع jāmi‘ comprehensive, extensive, broad, general, universal; collector; compiler (of a book); compositor, typesetter; (pl. جوامع jawāmi‘ ) mosque│ جامع مسجد (masjid) great, central mosque where the public prayer is performed on Fridays
جامعة jāmi‘a pl. -āt league, union, association; community; federation; religious community, communion; commonness, community of interests or purpose; university│O الكھرباء جامعة j. al- kahrabā’ storage battery, accumulator; االمم جامعة j. al-umam League of Nations;
Pan-Islamism; (islāmīya) الجامعة االسالمية جامعة الدول and (‘arabīya) الجامعة العربية جامعة شعبية League; Arab the (duwal) العربية adult extension, university (ša‘bīya) courses evening courses, education
جامعى jāmi‘ī academic, collegiate, university (adj.); university graduate
مجموع majmū‘ collected, gathered; totality, whole; total, sum (arith.)│ الحروف المجموعة matter (typ.); القطر اراضى مجموع m. arāḍī l-quṯr the total area of the country; طوله مجموع m. ṯūlihī its total length; المجموع العصبي (‘aṣabī) the nervous system
مجموعة majmū‘a pl. -āt, مجاميع majāmī‘  collection (e.g., of works of art, of stamps, etc., also of stories); compilation, list; group {also, e.g., of trees, of islands, etc.); series (e.g., of articles in a newspaper; O battery (el.); alliance, league, bloc (e.g., of states); collective, collectivistic organization; aggregate; complex, block (of buildings); system; bulletin, periodical│ الشمسية المجموعة (šamāīya) the solar system; صناعية مجموعة (ṣinā‘īya) syndicate
مجمع mujammi‘ collector (techn.); O storage battery, accumulator
عليه مجمع mujma‘ ‘alaihi (that which is) agreed upon, unanimous
مجتمع mujtama‘ pl. -āt gathering place, place of assembly; meeting place, rendezvous; assembly, gathering, meeting; society; human society; community, commune, collective
alphabetically up look جمكية = جامكية
  جمل jamala u (jaml) to sum up, summarize (ھ s.th.); -- jamula u (جمال jamāl) to be beautiful; to be handsome, pretty, comely, graceful; to be proper, suitable, appropriate (ب for s.o.), befit (ب s.o.) II to make beautiful, beautify, embellish, adorn (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) III to be polite, courteous, amiable (. to 8.0.) IV to sum, total, add (ھ s.th.); to treat as a whole, mention collectively (ھ s.th.); to sum up, summarize (ھ s.th.); to act well, decently, be nice V to make o.s. pretty, adorn o.s.
VI to be courteous, be friendly to one another
 جملة jumla pl. جمل jumal totality, sum, whole; group, troop, body; crowd; wholesale; (gram.) sentence, clause; جملة jumlatan completely, wholly, on the whole, altogether, in general, at all│ جملة واحدة jumlatan wāḥidatan all at once, at one swoop; الكائنات جملة everything in existence; اصحابه جملة من كان he was one of his companions, he belonged to his companions; قاله ما جملة فى قال (jumlati) among other things, he said ... ; القول وجملة ان wa-jumlatu l-qauli anna or ان االمر وجملة in short ... , to sum up …, briefly
stated ... ; الجملة على in short, in a word; بالجملة wholly, on the whole, altogether, in general, at all; by wholesale (com.); جملة المستحقة االجرة j. al-ujra al-mustaḥiqqa gross wage; الجملة تاجر  wholesaler, wholesale dealer; 41.J:1 ~ sr,. al·j. whole- sale price; اسمية جملة (ismīya) nominal clause; فعلية جملة (fi‘līya) verbal clause; جملة اخبارية (iḳbārīya) or خبرية جملة (ḳabarīya) declarative sentence (or clause); انشائية جملة (inšā’īya) exclamatory sentence; حالية جملة (ḥālīya) circumstantial clause; جملة شرطي(šarṯīya) conditional clause; جملة معترضة (mu‘tariḍa) parenthetical clause
الجمل حساب ḥisāb al-jummal (or jumal) use of the letters of the alphabet according to their numerical value
al-j. ‘ilm علم الجمال beauty│O jamāl جمال
aesthetics
جميل jamīl beautiful, graceful, lovely, comely, pretty, handsome; friendly act, favor, service, good turn; courtesy│اعتراف الجميل معرفة بالجميل، ma‘rifat al-j. and عرفان بالجميل (‘irfān) gratitude;  نكران  الجميلnukrān al-j. ingratitude; الجميل ناكر ungrateful; جميال له حفظ (ḥafiẓa) to keep s.o. in fond remembrance, remember s.o. with gratitude
اجمل ajmal  more beautiful
تجميل tajmīl beautification, embellishment; cosmetics
مجاملة mujāmala pl. -āt (act of) courtesy; civility, amiability; flattery; مجاملة mujāmalatan amicably, in a friendly way│ مجاملة زيارة ziyārat m. courtesy call; قواعد المجامالت etiquette
اجمال ijmāl summation, summing up; summarization; اجماال ijmālan on the whole, in general, generally speaking, as a general principle│ اقول لذلك اجماال to sum up, I (would) say ... ; اجماله فى in its entirety, as a whole; باالجمال and االجمال على in general, on the whole, altogether; بوجه االجمال bi-wajhi l-i. = اجماال
اجمالى ijmālī comprehensive, summary, general, over-all, total, collective│تقرير اجمالى over-all report; اجمالية غرامة (garāma) collective penalty; اجمالية نظرة (naẓra) general view
مجمل mujmil pl. -ūn wholesaler, wholesale dealer
مجمل mujmal summary, resume, synopsis, compendium; general concept; sum, total│بالمجمل by wholesale
camel│ ajmāl اجمال jimāl, جمال pl. jamal جمل   chameleon a1-yahūd j. جمل اليھود
جمال jammāl pl. -ūn camel driver
جمان jumān (coll.; n. un. ة) pearls
جمھر jamhara to gather, collect (ھ ه، s.th., s.o.); to assemble (ه s.o.) II tajamhara to gather, flock together (crowd)
جمھرة jamhara multitude, crowd, throng; the great mass, the populace
جمھور jumhūr pl. جماھير jamāhīr  multitude; crowd, throng; general public, public; الجماھير the masses, the people
جمھرى iumhllri republican (adj. and n.)
republic│ -āt pl. jumhūriya جمھورية muttaḥida) (‘arabīya, الجمھورية العربية المتحدة الجمھورية االتحادية Republic; Arab United the of Republic Federal the (ittiḥādīya) االلمانية الجمھورية الديموقراطية االلمانية Germany; Democratic German the (dīmūqrāṯīya) Republic
تجمھر  tajamhur gathering (of people; crowd
جن janna u (jann, جنون junūn) to cover, hide, conceal, veil (على ھ، s.th.); to descend, fall, be or become dark (night); pass. junna: to be or become possessed, insane, mad, crazy│ جنونه جن (junūnuhū) to get madly excited, become frantic II to craze, make crazy, drive insane, madden, enrage, infuriate (ه s.o.) IV to cover, veil, hide,
 conceal (ھ s.th.); = II; V to go mad, become crazy X to be covered, veiled, concealed; to regard (ه s.o.) as crazy, think (ه s.o.) mad
جن (coll.) jinn, demons (invisible beings, either harmful or helpful, that interfere with the lives of mortals)
جنى jinnī demonic; jinni, demon
جنية jinnīya female demon
جنة janna pl. -at, جنان jinān garden; paradise│ النعيم جنات paradise; الجنان ساكن inhabitant of paradise, deceased person, one of blessed memory
جنينة junaina pl. -āt, جنائن janā’in  little garden; garden
جنائنى janā’inī gardener
جنة jinna possession, obsession; mania, madness, insanity
جنة junna pl. جنن junan protection, shelter, shield
جنان janān pl. اجنان ajnān heart, soul
جنان jannān gardener
ajnūn اجنون ajinna, اجنة pl. janīn جنين
embryo, fetus; germ (in a seed, etc.)
جنون junūn possession, obsession; mania, madness, insanity, dementia; foolishness, folly; frenzy, rage, fury; ecstasy, rapture│فنون الجنون al-j. funūn madness has many varieties, manifests itself in many ways
جنوني junūnī crazy, insane, mad; frantic, frenzied
مجن mijann pl. مجان majānn  shield مجنة majanna madness, insanity جان jānn jinn, demons
مجنون majnūn pl. مجانين majānīn  possessed, obsessed; insane, mad; madman, maniac, lunatic; crazy, cracked; crackpot; foolish; fool
جنب janaba u to avert, ward off (ه ھ from s.o. s.th.) II to keep away, avert, ward off (ه ھ from s.o. s.th.), keep s.o. (ه) out of the way of (ھ), spare (ه ھ s.o. s.th.) III to be or walk by s.o.’s (ه) side; to run alongside of (ھ), run parallel to (ھ), skirt, flank (ھ
s.th.); to avoid (ھ s.th.) V to avoid (ھ s.th., ه s.o.); to keep away (ه ھ، from), steer clear, get out of the way (ه ھ، of) VI and VIII = V; VIII to be at the side of (ھ), run side by side with (ھ), run alongside of (ھ), skirt, flank (ھ s.th.)
جنب janb pl. جنوب junūb, اجناب ajnāb side; janba (prep.) beside, next to, near, at│جنب الى جنبا (also لجنب جنبا) side by side; جنبيه بين (janbaihi) inside (it), within; بين ما جنبيه (baina janbaihi) what it contains, comprises, its contents; جنب على aside, apart; الجنب ذات pleurisy
جنبة janba pl. janabāt side; region, area│ جنباته فى in it, within, wide; بين ضمه جنباته (ḍammahū) to comprise, hold, contain s.th.; الغرفة جنبات j. al-gurfa the whole room; الغرفة جنبات بين in (the middle of) the room; الجنبات زاخر crammed, chock- full, brimful, filled to overflowing or bursting
جنبى janbī lateral, side (adj.)
جنب junub in a state of major ritual impurity; not belonging to the tribe, not a kinsman│ الجنب الجارthe neighbor not belonging to the family
جناب jināb (title of respect) approx.: Right Honorable; جنابكم Your Honor; you (polite form)
جنابة janāba major ritual impurity (Isl.
Law)
pleurisy )ذات الجنب (= junāb جناب
جنوب janūb south; جنوبا janūban
southward, to the south
South جنوبى افريقيا southern│ janūbī جنوب Africa
جنب jānib pl. جوانب jawānib  side; lateral portion; sidepiece; flank; wing; face (geom.); part, portion, partial amount; partial view, section (من of a scene, picture or panorama); quantity, amount; a certain number (من of), a few, some│ جانبه من on his part; آخر جانب من – جانب من on the one hand -- on the other hand; جانبه الى to him, to his address; at his (its) side, next to him (it); بجانبه beside him (it), next to him (it); جانب الى and بجانب side by side with; in addition to; apart from, aside from; وضعه جانبا to put s.th. aside; جانبا ودعه to leave
 s.th. aside, omit s.th.; جانب فى in comparison with, as compared with, as against; regarding, with regard to; بين ما جوانبھم their hearts; الفم جانبا jānibā l-fam the comers of the mouth; من جانب a considerable, or certain, degree of; a considerable amount of, a good deal of; من كبير جانب a great deal of, a large portion of; من كبير جانب على he is very …; على كان الكرم من عظيم جانب (karam) to be very generous; االھمية من عظيم جانب على (ahammīya) of great importance; اعظم على الخطورة من جانب ‘alā a‘ẓami jānibin min al- kuṯūra of utmost importance, of greatest significance; جانب كل فى everywhere, on all sides; جانبه له خفض (ḳafaḍa, jānibahū) to show o.s. condescending, affable or gracious to s.o.; to meet s.o. on fair terms; جانبه امن amina jānibahū to be safe from s.o.; اھتمام جانب اعره لم (u‘irhu) I paid not the least attention to him; (ھاب رھب،) خاف جانبه (jānibahū) to fear s.o., be afraid of s.o.; الجانب ملك milk al-j. crown lands; جانب الميري j. al-mīrī (eg.) fisc, treasury; لين الجانب layyin al-j. gentle; docile, tractable, compliant; الجانب لين līn al-j. gentleness; الجوانب رحب raḥb al-j. roomy; spacious, unconfined; الجانب رقيق friendly, amiable, gentle; الجانب مرھوب feared, dreaded; عزيز الجانب powerful, mighty, strong; الجانب عزة ‘izzat al-j. power; الجانب مھيب mahīb al-j. dreaded, respected; الدار جوانب فى about the house, all over the house; often = جوانبه فى فيه
جانبى jānibī lateral, side, by- (in compounds)
اجنبي ajnabī foreign, alien; (pl. -ūn, اجانب ajānib  foreigner, alien│األجنبية البالد the foreign countries, the outside world; فرقة االجانب firqat al-ajānib the Foreign Legion
جنابية gannābīya pl. –āt (eg.) curb; embankment, levee; side channel, lateral (following a road or railroad tracks); bypass (of a lock or sluice)
تجنب tajannub avoidance
اجتناب ijtināb avoidance
مجنبة mujanniba flank, wing (of an army
جمبري  see جنبري
جنباز junbāz, جمباز calisthenics; gymnastics; athletics
جنبازي junbāzī (جمبازي) calisthenic(al), gymnastic│ الجمبازية االلعاب gymnastic exercises, physical exercises
جنح janaḥa a (جنوح junūḥ) to incline, be inclined, tend (ل or الى to); to lean (ل or الى to or toward); to turn, go over (الى to), join (الى s.th.), associate o.s. (الى with); to strand (على or الى on a coast; ship); to diverge, deviate, depart (عن from); to turn away (عن from), break (عن with) II to provide (ھ s.th.) with wings, lend wings ( ھ to s.th.) IV to incline, be inclined, tend ( ل or الى to); to lean (ل or الى to or toward); to turn (ل or الى to s.th.); to strand (ship)
جنح jinḥ side
جنح junḥ, jinḥ darkness gloom│جنح فى الليل (j. il-lail) in the dark of night, under cover of night; الكرى جنحي بين (junḥay il- karā) lit.: between the two halves of slumber, i.e., at night when everyone’s asleep
جنحة junḥa pl. جنح junaḥ misdemeanor (jur., less than a felony, جناية, and more than an infraction, مخالفة)
جناح janāḥ pl. اجنحة ajniḥa, اجنح ajnuḥ wing (of a bird. of an airplane, of a building, of an army); side; flank│ فى انا جناحه I am under his protection; جناح على االثير over the ether, by radio; جناح على السرعة (j. is-sur‘a) with winged haste
جناح junāḥ misdemeanor (jur.); sin│ ال عليه جناح (junāḥa) it won’t be held against him if he ... ; it won't do any harm if he …
اجنح ajnaḥ  more inclined (الى to
جنوح janūḥ inclined (الى s.th.)
جنوح junūḥ inclination, leaning, bent, tendency (الى to)
جانح jāniḥ side, flank, wing
جانحة jāniḥa pl. جوانح jawāniḥ  rib; pl. also bosom, heart, soul│جوانحي بين in my bosom, at heart; جوانحھا طفرت (ṭafarat) she became happily excited, she trembled with joy
مجنح mujannaḥ winged
 جند II to draft, conscript, enlist, recruit (ه s.o.; mil.); to mobilize (ھ an army, على against) V to be drafted, be conscripted, be enlisted (for military service)
جند jund m. and f., pl. جنود junūd, اجناد ajnād soldiers; army│الخالص جند j. al- ḳalāṣ Salvation Army
جندى jundī pl. جنود junūd soldier, private│ اول جندى (awwal) private first class (Ir., Syr.); مستجد جندى (mustajidd) recruits (Ir., Syr.); المجھول الجندي the Unknown Soldier
جندية jundīya military affairs, the army, the military; military service
تجنيد tajnīd draft, enlistment (mil.) recruitment; mobilization│االجباري التجنيد (ijbārī) military conscription
تجند tajannud military service
مجند mujannad recruit
جندارى gindārī standard-bearer, comet (Eg.) جندب jundub pl. جنادب janādib  grasshopper   جندر gandara (eg.) to mangle (ھ laundry)
جندرة gandara mangling (of laundry); press; O rotary press (typ.)
  جندارى look up alphabetically
جندرمة žandarma gendarmery
جندرمى žandarmī gendarme
جندفلى ganduflī (eg.) oysters 140
  جندل jandala to throw to the ground, bring down, fell (ه s.o.)
جندل jandal pl. جنادل janādil  stone; pl.
جنادل cataract, waterfall (eg.)
  جندول gundūl (eg.) pl. جناديل ganādīl  gondola
جنرال jenərāl, ginrāl (eg.) general (military rank)
جنز II to say the burial prayers, conduct the funeral service (ه for the deceased; Chr.)
جنازة jināza, janāza pl. -āt جنائز janā’iz 
bier; funeral procession
جناز junnāz pl. جنانيز janānīz  requiem, funeral rites, obsequies; funeral procession
ginger )زنجبيل (= janzabīl جنزبيل
  جنزير janzara (= زنجر) to be or become covered with verdigris
verdigris )زنجار(= jinzār جنزار
  جنزير jinzīr (= زنجير) pl. جنازير janāzīr  chain; track (of a caterpillar, of a tank, etc.); a linear measure (= 5 qaṣaba = 17.75 m; also = 20 m; Eg.)│جنزير طارة ṭārat j. track sprocket, sprocket wheel
مجنزر mujanzar track-laying (vehicle)
جنس II to make alike, make similar (ھ s.th.); to assimilate, naturalize (ه s.o.); to class, classify, sort, categorize (ھ s.th.) III to be akin, be related, similar (ه ھ، to), be of the same kind or nature (ه as s.o., ھ as s.th.), be like s.o. or s.th. (ه ھ،) resemble (ه s.o., ھ s.th.) V to have o.s. naturalized, acquire the citizenship (ب); to be naturalized VI to be akin, related, of the same kind or nature, homogeneous
جنس jins pl. اجناس ajnās kind, sort, variety, species, class, genus; category; sex (male, female); gender (gram.); race; nation│ الجنس اسمism al-j. (gram.) generic noun, collective noun of nonpersonal things (which form a n. un. in الجنس ؛(ة البشري (bašarī) the human race; جنسنا ابناء abnā’ jinsinā our fellow tribesmen; ھو الجنس مصري he is Egyptian by nationality; ا اللطيف لجنس the fair sex; الخشن الجنس the strong sex
جنسي  jinsī generic; sexual; racial الجنسي lā-jinsī asexual, sexless جنسية jinsīya pl. -āt nationality,
citizenship
تجنيس tajnīs naturalization; paronomasia (rhet.)
جناس jinās (rhet.) assonance, pun, paronomasia
مجانسة mujānasa relatedness, kinship, affinity; similarity, likeness, resemblance
تجنس tajannus acquisition of citizenship, naturalization
تجانسtajānūs homogeneity, homogeneousness; likeness, similarity, resemblance
مجانس mujānis similar, like, related; homogeneous
 متجنس mutajannis naturalized
متجانس mutajānis akin, related, of the same kind or nature, homogeneous
جنطيانا (Lat. Gentiana) gentian (eg.)
  جنفVI to deviate (عن from); to incline, be inclined (الى or ل to s.th.)
  جنيف look up alphabetically
جنفاص junfāṣ, جنفيص junfaiṣ sackcloth, sacking
جنك junk pl. جنوك junūk harp
جنوا janowā Genoa (seaport in NW Italy)
جنى janā i (jany) to pick, gather, harvest, reap ( ھ s.th., also the fruits of one’s work); to pocket, rake in, collect (ھ s.th.); to derive (ھ profit, من from); to secure, realize (ھ profits, an advantage); to incur (ھ evil, harm, punishment); to cause, 141 provoke, bring about (ھ s.th.); -- (جناية jināya) to commit a crime, an outrage (على on); to offend, sin (على against); to commit, perpetrate (ذنبا جناية، danban a crime, an offense; على, less frequently الى, on or against); to inflict (ھ some evil, على on s.o.); to harm (على s.o., s.th.) V to incriminate, accuse, charge with a crime ( على s.o.), lay the blame (على on s.o.), blame (على s.o.); to act meanly VIII to gather, harvest (ھ s.th.)
جنى jany harvest; reaping (fig.); -- janan
(coll.) fruits
جناية jināya pl. -āt perpetration of a crime; felony (jur.; in the strictly legal sense, more than a misdemeanor, جنحة, and an infraction, مخالفة), capital offense │ الجنايات محكمة maḥkamat al-j. criminal court
محكمة جنائية law criminal│ jinā’ī  جنائي القانون الجنائي court; criminal (maḥkama) law penal law, criminal
مجنى majnan pl. مجان majānin that which is picked or harvested, a crop; source of profit or advantage
تجن tajannin incrimination, accusation ( على of s.o.); mean way of acting, low, underhand dealings
جان jānin pl. جناة junāh perpetrator (of a delict); delinquent, criminal
عليه مجنى majnīy ‘alaih, harmed, injured; aggrieved party; victim of a crime
جنيف (Fr. Geneve) žənēf Geneva
جنيه (Engl. guinea) ginēh, also gunaih pl. –āt pound (eg.)│استرليني) انجليزي جنيه) pound sterling, English pound; مصري جنيه Egyptian pound (abbreviation: م ج)
وجه see جھة
جھبذ jahbad pl. جھابذة jahābida man endowed with a critical mind; great scholar; bright, brilliant, intelligent
جھد jahada a (jahd) to endeavor, strive, labor, take pains, put o.s. out; to over-work, overtax, fatigue, exhaust (ه s.o.) III to endeavor, strive; to fight (الشيء سبيل فى for s.th.); t.o wage holy war against the infidels IV to strain, exert (ھ s.th.); to tire, wear out, fatigue (ه s.o.), give trouble (ه to)│فى نفسه اجھد (nafsahū) to go to great lengths, go out of one’s way (في for or in s.th.); فى فكره اجھد (fikrahū) to concentrate on, put one's mind to, apply o.s. t.o VIII to put o.s. out (فى for s.th.), work hard; (Isl. Law) to formulate an independent judgment in a legal or theological question (based on the application of the 4 uṣūl; as opposed to taqlid, q.v.)
جھد jahd pl. جھود juḥūd strain; exertion; endeavor, attempt, effort; trouble, pains ( فى on behalf or for the sake of s.th.); O voltage, tension (el.)│جھده جھد jahada jahdahū, also جھده (حاول) عمل to do (try) one’s utmost, do (try) all in one’s power, make every conceivable effort; جھيد بجھد bi-jahdin jahīdin with great difficulty, by dint of atrenuous efforts; جھيد جھد بعد after a lot of trouble O عال جھد (‘ālin) high tension (el.)
جھد juhd strain, exertion; juhda (used prepositionally) to the limit of ... │جھد الطاقة juhda ṭ-ṭāqa as far as possible, as much as possible; طاقته جھد j. ṭāqatihī as much as he can, to the limit of his abilities; امكانه جھد juhda imkānihī do.; جھد ما juhda mā as much as. to the limits of what ... ; جھدي juhdī as far as I can
jahd جھد see jahīd جھيد
جھاد jihād fight, battle; jihad, holy war (against the infidels, as a religious duty)
 جھادي jihādī fighting, military
مجاھدة mujāhada fight, battle
اجھاد ijhād exertion; overexertion, overstrain(ing) 142
اجتھاد ijtihād effort, exertion, endeavor, pains, trouble; application, industry, diligence; (Isl. Law) independent judgment in a legal or theological queetion, based on the interpretation and application of the 4 uṣūl, as opposed to taqlīd, q.v.; individual judgment
مجھود majhūd pl. -āt endeavor, effort, exertion, pains, trouble, work; O voltage, tension (el.)│مجھوداته بذل to make every effort, go to greatest lengths
مجاھد mujāhid pl. -ūn fighter, freedom fighter; warrior; sergeant (Eg. 1939)
مجھد mujhid strenuous, exacting, trying, grueling; -- mujhad overworked, exhausted
مجتھد mujtahid diligent, industrious; (pl.
-ūn) mujtahid, a legist formulating independcnt decisions in legal or theological matters, based on the interpretation and application of the four uṣūl, as oppoeed to muqallid, q.v.
جھر jahara a (jahr, جھار jihār) to be brought to light, come out, show, appear; -- to declare publicly, announce (ھ or ب s.th.); to avow in public, proclaim (ب s.th.); to raise (ھ the voice); -- jahura u (جھارة jahāra) to be loud, be clearly audible (voice) III to declare or say openly, voice, utter, express frankly (ب s.th.)
جھر jahr and جھار jihār publicness, publicity, notoriety; جھرا jahran and جھارا jihāran publicly, in public
جھرة jahratan openly, overtly, frankly, publicly
جھري jahrī notorious, well-known, public
جھير jahīr loud (voice, shout)
اجھر ajhar  day-blind
اجھر ajhar  (elative) louder, more audible
جمھري jahwarī loud (voice)
مجھر mijhar loud-voiced
majāhir  مجاھر pl. mijhar مجھر
microsoope
مجھرى mijharī microscopic(al)
مجھار mijhār loud-voiced; O loudspeaker
مجاھرة mujāhara franknees, candor (of one’s words)
جھز jahaza a to finish off (على a wounded man), deliver the coup de grace to (على) II to make ready, prepare (ھ s.th.); to arrange (ھ s.th.); to provide, supply (ھ s.th.); to equip, fit out, furnish, supply, provide (ه ب or ھ s.th. or s.o. with) IV to finish off (على a wounded man), deliver the coup de grace to (على); to finish, ruin ( على s.o.) V to he equipped, furnished, supplied, provided; to equip o.s.; to prepare o.s., get ready; to be ready, be prepared
جھاز jahāz (alas pronounced jihāz) pl.
-āt, اجھزة ajhiza equipment, appliances, outfit, gear, rig; trousseau; contrivance, gadget; implement, appliance, utensil; installation, apparatus (techn.); system, apparatus (anat.) │ السلكي جھاز (lā-silkī) wirelees set, radio; راديو جھاز radio (receiving set); O مستقبل جھاز (mustaqbil), O االستقبال جھاز, O االلتقاط جھاز receiver, receiving set (radio); مذيع جھاز (muḍī‘), O االرسال جھاز j. al-irsāl transmitter (radio); تليفزيوني جھاز  television set;  الحفر جھاز j.
جھاز دوري derrick; oil rig; drilling al-ḥafr جھاز (anat.); system circulatory (daurī) جھاز قياس الھزات or لتسجيل االھتزازات االرضية جھاز arḍīya)seismograph; (hazzāt, االرضية organization, secret (sirrī) سري جھاز االستماع organization; underground the (‘aṣabī) الجھاز العصبي locator; sound al-haḍm j. جھاز الھضم system; nervous apparatus digestive
تجھيز tajhīz equipment, furnishment; preparation; pl. تجھيزات equipment, gear 144
تجھيزي tajhīzī preparatory; (of a school) preparing for college
جاھز jāhiz ready, prepared; readymade; equipped │ ملبوسات) جاھزة or) البسة (albisa) ready-made clothes
 مجھز mujahhaz equipped, provided, furnished, supplied (ب with); armed (ب with guns; of a ship, tank, etc.)
جھش IV to sob, break into sobs│ بالبكاء اجھش (bukā’) to be on the verge of tears, struggle with tears; to break into tears
جھشة jahša (n. vic.) pl. -āt sob; outburst of tears
اجھاش ijhāš outburst of tears
جھض IV to bear young ones, litter; to have a miscarriage (woman)│ نفسھا اجھضت (nafsahā) she induced an abortion
جھض jihḍ miscarried fetus
جھيض jahīḍ miscarried fetus
اجھاض ijhāḍ miscarriage, abortion; induced abortion
جھل jahila a (jahl, جھالة jahāla) to be ignorant; not to know (ب or ھ s.th., how to do s.th.); to be irrational, foolish; to behave foolishly (على toward) VI to ignore (ھ s.th.); to refuse to have anything to do (ھ with), shut one’s eyes (ھ to), disregard (ھ a fact); to affect ignorance, pretend to know nothing X to consider ignorant or stupid (ه s.o.)
جھل jahl and جھالة jahāla ignorance; folly, foolishness, stupidity│ جھل عن out of ignorance
جھول jahūl ignorant; foolish, stupid
مجھل majhal pl. مجاھل majāhil  unknown region, unexplored territory │ افريقيا مجاھل unknown Africa
تجھيل tajhīl stultification
تجاھل  tajāhul ignoring, disregard(ing)
جاھل jāhil pl. جھلة jahala, جھل juhhal, جھال juhhāl, جھالء juhalā’ not knowing (ب s.th., how to do s.th.); ignorant, uneducated, illiterate; foolish; fool
جاھلى jāhilī pagan, of or pertaining to pre-Islamic times
جاھلية jāhilīya state of ignorance; pre-
Islamic paganism, pre-Islamic times
مجھول majhūl unknown; anonymous (also االسم مجھول m. al-ism); pl. مجاھيل majāhīl  unknown things│ المجھول صيغة ṣīgat al-m. passive (gram.)
مجھولية majhūlīya being unknown, unknown nature
جھم jahuma u (جھامة jahāma, جھومة juhūma) to frown, glower V to frown, scowl, glower; to regard with displeasure (,ه ھ or ل s.o. or s.th.), frown (ھ or ل on); to eye gloomily, coolly, grimiy (ه ھ، or ل s.o., s.th.); to become sullen, gloomy (face)
جھم jahm sullen, glum, morose, gloomy (face)
جھام jahām clouds
جھامة jahāma and جھومة juhūma grim look, sullen expression; gloominoss; brooding silence
جھنم jahannam  (f.) hell
جھنمي jahannamī hellish, infernal
جو jaww pl. اجواء ajwā’, جواء jiwā’ (pl. frequently with singnlar meaning) air; atmosphere (also fig.); sky; weather; sphere, milieu, environment; جوا jawwan by air; by telegraph, telegraphically│بريد الجو air mail; الجو طبقات ṭabaqāt al-j. air layers; ممطر جو فى (mumṭir) in rainy weather
جوى jawwī air, aerial, aero- (in compounds); airy, atmospheric(al); weather (used attributively), meteorologic(al)│الجوي الضغط (ḍagṯ) atmospheric pressure; جوية طبقات (ṭabaqāt) air layers; جوي اسطول (usṭūl) air fleet; غارة جوية air raid; الجوية القوات (quwāt) air force; الجوية المالحة aviation; جوية ميناء (mīnā’) airport; جوية ارصاد meteorological observations; جوي حجر (ḥajar) meteorite
جوا (colloq.) jawwā (pronounced gūwa
in Eg.) in it, within; inside
جوانى jawwānī, juwwānī inner, inside, interior
جوافة guwāfa (eg.) guava (fruit); guavshrub
جوال (eg.) guwāl pl. -āt sack جوانتي (It. guanti; eg.) gloves   جوب (Fr. jupe) skirt
 (جاب (جوب jāba u (jaub) to travel, wander (ھ through), traverse, roam, tour, explore (ھ s.th., e.g., foreign lands); to pierce, penetrate (ھ s.th.), cut through (ھ); to wander, cruise (ھ about a place) III to
 answer (ه s.على ،.خ s.th.), reply, respond (ه to s.o., على to s.th.); to comply (ھ with), accede (ھ to) IV to answer (ه or الى s.o., عن or على a question), reply, respond (ه or الى to s.o., على to s.th.); to comply (ھ with a request), accede, defer (ھ to); to hear (ه s.o.), accede to the request or wishes of ( ه); to fulfill, grant (ھ a wish); to consent, assent, agree (الى to); to concur (الى in)│ طلبه الى اجاب ṯalabihi) to comply with s.o.’s request VI to reply to one another; to echo (ب ھ، from); to ring out (voices); to be (mutually) corresponding, harmonize; to be favorahle, propitious (مع to s.o.; situation) VIl to scatter, break up, pass over (clauds); to be dispelled, disappear, vanish (worries); to fade (darkness) X استجاب to hear, answer (ھ a prayer), grant ( ھ a request); to comply with the request of (ل), accede or defer to the wiohes of (ل); to react (ل to); to respond (ل to, ب with), listen, pay attention (ل to), show interest ( ل in); to meet, answer (ل ب s.o. with), reply (ل ب to s.o. with or hy doing s.th.); to resound, reverberate, re-echo; to resonate (ل or الى to s.th.), be in resonance with (phys.); -- استجوب istajwaba to interrogate, examine, question (ه s.o.); to hear (ه the defendant or witn...); to interpellate (ه s.o.; in parliament)
جوب jaub travening, touring, exploration (of foreign countries); piercing, penetration
جوبة jauba pl. -āt, جوب juwab opening, gap; hole, pit
جواب jawāb pl. اجوبة ajwiba answer, reply; octave (to a given tone; mus.); (eg.; pronounced gawāb pl. -āt) letter, message│الشرط جواب j. aš-šarṭ, main clause (conclusion) of a conditional sentence, apodosis
جوابى jawābī answering (used attributively)
جواب jawwāb traverser (of foreign countries), traveler, explorer
اجابة ijāba answer(ing), reply(ing), response, respondence; compliance; fulfillment, granting (of a request); accession, consent, assent│لطلبكم اجابة ijābatan li-ṭalabikum, in compliance with your request; in answer to your request
تجاوب tajāwub agreement, conformity; harmony
استجابة istijāba hearing, answering (of a prayer); granting, fulfillment (of a request); resonance; consonance (phys.)│ ا ل ستجابة istijābatan li in compliance with, in answer to, in deference to
استجواب istijwāb pl. -āt interrogation, questioning; hearing; interview; interpellation (in parliament)
متجاوب mutajāwib harmonious
مستجيب mustajīb hearing, answering, granting; reverberant, resonant, resonating; responsive, susceptible, impressible 145
جوت (Engl.) jūt jute
جوح) جاح) jāḥa u and IV to annihilate, destroy, ruin; to flood, inundate (ھ the land) VIII do.; to carry away, sweep away (ه s.o., s.th.; storm); to put down, subdue, quell ( ھ s.th., e.g., a riot)
اجاحة destruction, annihilation; crop damage; crop failure, bad harvest
اجتياح ijtiyāḥ destruction, annihilation; subdual, suppression
جائح jā’iḥ crushing, devastating; disastrous
جائحة jā’iḥa pl. جوائح jawā’iḥ  calamity, disaster, ruin; epldemic; crop damage
جوخ jūḳ pl. اجواخ ajwāḳ broadcloth
جود) جاد) jāda u (جودة jūda) to be or become good, become better, improve; -- (jūd) to grant generously (ب s.th.), be so generous as to do s.th. (ب with verbal noun); to be liberal, openhanded (ب with s.th., على toward s.o.), bestow liberally (ب s.th., على upon s.o.), grant, give lavishly (ب of s.th., على to s.o.), shower (على ب s.o. with); to donate (ب a sum of money, etc.) │بنفسه جاد to sacrifice o.s.; to give up the ghost; جادت بالدمع عيناه  (‘aināhu bi-d-dam‘) tears welled from his eyes; السماء جادت (heavens granted rain) it rained II to do well (ھ s.th.); to make better, improve, better, ameliorate (ھ s.th.); to recite (the Koran; cf. تجويد) IV to do well, do excellently (ھ s.th.); to master (ھ s.th.), be skilled, proficient (ھ in), be an expert (ھ at), be
 conversant (ھ with an art or field of knowledge); to accomplish or say good, excellent thing; to achieve excellent results; to be excellent, outstanding, distinguish o.s. (e.g., as a poet) │لغة اجاد (lugatan) to master language; العزف اجاد البيانو على (‘azfa) to play the piano well X to think (ھ s.th.) good or excellent, approve of (ھ); to consider (ھ s.th.) suitable for or appropriate to (ل)
جود jūd openhandedness, liberality, generosity
جود jaud heavy rains
جد   under see جادة
جودة jūda goodness, excellence
جيد jayyid pl. جياد jiyād good, perfect, faultless; outstanding, excellent, first-rate; good (as an examination grade); جيدا jayyidan well, excellently; thoroughly │ جدا جيد (jidda) very good (also as an examination grade)
اجود ajwad  better ,
جواد jawād pl. اجواد ajwād, اجاود ajāwid , اجاويد ajawīd , جود jūd openhanded, liberal, generous, magnanimous; jawād pl. جياد jiyād, اجياد ajyād, اجاويد ajāwīd  race horse, racer; charger │ االجواد ابنnoble man
تجويد tajwīd art of reciting the Koran, Koran reading (in accordance with established rule, of pronunciation and intonation)
مجيد mujīd adept, efficient, proficient جودار jaudār see جاودار (alphabetically) جور) جار) jāra u (jaur) to deviate, stray (عن
from); to commit an outrage (على on), bear down (على upon), wrong, persecute, oppress, tyrannize (على s.o.); to encroach, make inroads (على on another’s territory) III to be the neighbor of s.o. (ه), live next door to (ه); to be adjacent, be next (ھ to s.th.), adjoin (ھ s.th.); to be in the immediate vicinity of (ھ ه), be close to (ه، ھ); to border (ھ on) IV to grant asylum or a sanctuary (ه to s.o.); to protect (ه s.o., من from), take (ه s.o.) under one’s wing; to stand by s.o. (ه), aid (ه s.o.) VI to be neighbors; to be adjacent; to have a common border X to seek protection, seek
refuge (ب with s.o., من from s.th.), appeal for aid (ه to s.o., من against s.th.) 146
جور jaur injustice; oppression, tyranny; outrage
جار jār pl. جيران jīrān neighbor; refugee; protégé, charge
جارة jāra pl. -āt neighboress
جيرة jīra neighborhood
جورة jūra pl. جور juwar pit, hole
جورى see alphabetically
جوار jiwār neighborhood, proximity; بجوار in the neighborhood of, in the vicinity of, near, close to
مجاورة mujāwara neighborhood, proximity
جائر jā’ir pl. جورة jawara, جارة jāra unjust. unfair; tyrannical, despotic; tyrant, oppressor, despot
مجاور mujāwir neighboring, adjacent; near, close by; (pl. -ūn) student (esp. of Al Azhar University; living in the vicinity of the Mosque)
ئمجير mujīr protector
متجاور mutajāwir having a common border; adjoining, adjacent, contiguous
جورب jaurab pl. جوارب jawārib  stocking; sock
جورجيا jorjiyā Georgia (republic of the U.S.S.R.)
  جوري jūrī damask rose (Rosa damascena,
bot.); crimson
  جوري (Engl.) jūrī jury
 (جاز (جوز jāza u (جواز jawāz, مجاز majāz) to pass, come, travel (ھ through); to pass (ھ an examination, a test); to be allowed, permitted, permissible; to be possible, conceivable; to work, succeed (عليه with s.o.; deceit, artifice) │الحيلة عليه جازت (ḥīla) the trick worked with him, he fell for the trick II to permit, allow (ھ s.th.); to approve (ھ of), sanction, warrant, authorize (ھ s.th.) III to pass (ھ s.th. or by s.th.), go or walk past s.th. (ھ); to go beyond s.th. (ھ), overstep, cross, leave behind (ھ s.th.), also, e.g., من الثالثين جاوز العمر (‘umr) he is past thirty; to exceed, surpass (ھ s.th.); to pass over s.th. (عن),
 disregard (عن s.th.), pay no attention (عن to); to let (عن s.th.) go unpunished; to give up, forgo, relinquish (عن s.th.) IV to traverse, cross (ھ s.th., الى on the way to); to permit, allow (ل ھ to s.o. s.th.); to authorize (ل ھ s.o. to do s.th., also ه ھ); to license (ھ s.th.); to approve, confirm, endorse (ھ a decision, a judgment); to approve (ھ of s.th.), sanction (ھ s.th.) V to tolerate, suffer, bear VI to pass (ھ s.th. or by s.th.), go or walk past s.th. (ھ); to go beyond s.th. (ھ), overstep, cross, leave behind (ھ s.th.); to exceed, surpass (ھ s.th., also على); to go too far, overstep all bounds, encroach, make inroads; to pass over s.th. (عن), disregard (عن s.th.) pay no attention (عن to); to give up, forgo, re1inquish (A s.th.); to refrain from) VIII to pass, run, go (ھ through), cut across ( ھ); to cross (ھ a border, a street, a mountain range); to traverse (ھ a country or sea); to cover (ھ a distance); to pass (ھ through the mind; said of ideas, thoughts); to go (ھ through hard times or a crisis); to surmount, overcome (ھ a crisis) X to deem permissible (ھ s.th.); to ask permission
جوز jauz pl. اجواز ajwāz heart, center (of a desert, of a large area, etc.) │ فى اجوازamid, in the middle of, in; اجواز فى الفضاء (faḍā’) in space
جواز jawāz permissibility, admissibility; lawfulness, legality; permission, (official) permit, license, authorization; possibility, conceivability; passing (of an examination) │ السفر جواز j. as-safar (pl.
-āt) (traveling) passport 147
مجاز majāz crossing; passage; corridor (pol.-georgr.); metaphor, figurative expression (rhet.) │مجازا majāzanl, على المجاز سبيل figuratively, metaphorically
مجازى majāzī figurative, metaphorical
اجازة ijāza pl. -āt permission, authorization; approval; license; = Fr. licence as an academic degree; permit; vacation, leave (of absence) │ الحصر اجازة
i. al-ḥaṣr grant of patent, issue of letters patent; patent; قنصلية اجازة (qunṣulīya) exequatur of a consul (dipl.); مرضية اجازة (maraḍīya) sick leave; المدرسية االجازات
(madrasīya) school vacation; باالجازة غائب
on leave, on vacation
مجاوزة mujāwaza and تجاوز tajāwuz crossing; exceeding; overdraft, overdrawing (of an account); disregard ( عن for); relinquishment (عن of s.th.)
اجتياز ijtiyāz traversing, crossing; passage; transit; covering (of a distance); passing (of an examination); surmounting (of difficulties)
جائز jā’iz permitted, lawful, legal; conceivable, thinkable
جائزة jā’iza pl. جوائز jawā’iz  prize, reward, premium │دراسية جائزة  (dirāsīya) stipend, scholarship
مجاز mujāz licensed; licentiate (as an academic title, = Fr. licencié; e.g., فى مجاز العلوم licencié ès sciences)
  زوج = □ جوز II to give in marriage
couple زوج = ajwāz اجواز pl. jauz جوز □
□ مجوز (syr.; pronounced məžwez,  مزوج muzwaj) wind instrument with a double pipe, corresponding to the Egyptian zummāra)
  الجوزاء al-jauzā’ Gemini (astron.)
  جوز jauz (coll.; n. un. ة pl. -āt) walnut │جوز الطيب j. aṭ-ṭīb nutmeg; القيء جوز j. al-qai’ nux vomioa; الھند جوز j. al-hind, ھندي جوز (hindī) coconut; القز جوز j. alqazz cocoon, chrysalis of the silkworm
جوزة gōza (eg.) narghile
جوزي jauzī nut (used attributively and in compounds); nut-brown, hazel
  جاز look up alphabetically
جوزل jauzal pl. جوازل jawāzil  young pigeon (جاس (جوس jāsa u to peer around, pry around,
look around (خالل kilāla in); to search, investigate, explore (ھ s.th.) VIII to search, investigate, explore (ھ s.th.)
جوسق jausaq pl. جواسق jawāsiq  palace; manor, villa
جويطة gawīṭa pl. جوائط gawā’iṭ  (eg.) dowel, peg
 جوع) جاع) jā‘a u to be hungry; to starve II to cause (ه s.o.) to starve, starve out, famish ( ه s.o.) IV do.
جوع jū‘ hunger, starvation │جوعا مات to starve to death
جياع pl. jau‘ā’, جوعى f. jau‘ān , جوعان
jiyā‘ hungry, starved, famished
مجاعة majā‘a pl. -āt famine
جائع jā’i‘ pl. جياع jiyā‘,جوع juwwa‘ hungry, starved, famished
تجويع tajwī‘ starving out
اجاعة ijā‘a starving out
جوف II to make hollow, hollow out (ھ s.th.)
جوف jauf pl. اجواف ajwāf hollow, cavity; depression; interior, inside, center, heart; belly, abdomen; north (magr.) │جوف في inside, in the interior of, in the middle of; الليل جوف في (j. il-lail) or الليل جوف (jaufa) in the middle of the night
جوفي jaufī inner, interior, inside; subterranean, underground, subsurface (of geological strata); northern (magr.) │ مياه جوفيةground water 148
  اجوف ajwaf , f. جوفاء jaufā’, pl. جوف jūf hollow; empty; vain, futile, inane, pointless, senseless
تجويف tajwīf pl. تجاواف tajāwīf , hollow, cavity
مجوف mujawwaf hollowed out, hollow
جوق jauq pl. اجواق ajwāq and جوقة jauqa pl. -āt troop, group; theatrical troupe, operatic company; choir (mus.); orchestra, band (also الجوق مدير │ (موسيقية جوقة mudīr al-j. conductor, bandleader, choir leader; الشرف جوقة j. aš-šaraf Legion of Honor
  جول) جال) jāla u (jaul, جولة jaula, تجوال tajwāl, جوالن jawalān) to roam, rove, wander about; to move freely, be at home (في in a field of learning), occupy o.s. (في with); to be circulated, go the rounds; to pass (ب في، through the mind)│برأسه جال to preoccupy s.o., engross s.o.’s attention; في يجول ما بخاطره) خاطره) what he is preoccupied with, what is on his mind; عينيه في الدمع جال (dam‘, ‘ainaihi) his eyes swam in tears;
في يده جالت (yaduhū) he laid his hands on, he committed defalcations of IV to
circulate, pass around (ھ s.th.) │الرأي اجال (ra’ya) to weigh s.th. thoroughly, ponder s.th.; النظر اجال (naẓara) to let one’s eyes wander about; to look around V to roam, rove, wander about, move around; to patrol, go the rounds; to cruise; to tour, travel from place to place, travel about
جولة jaula pl. -āt circuit, round; patrol; excursion, outing; tour; (round) trip; voyage, run (of a steamer); (round-trip) flight (of an airplane); round (in sports)
جوال jawwāl wandering, migrant, itinerant, roving; cruising; traveling; ambulant; traveler, tourist; see also alphabetically │ جوال رامrāmin jawwāl pl. جوالة رماة rumāh jawwāla rifleman (mil.; Syr.)
جوالة jawwāla one given to roaming or traveling; wanderer, wayfarer; O motorcycle; cruiser
تجوال tajwāl migration, wandering, roving, traveling; nomadic life, nomadism
جوالن jawalān migration, wandering, roving, traveling; nomadic life, nomadism
│ اليد جوالن j. al-yad embezzlement, defalcation
مجال majāl pl. -āt room, space (ل for s.th.); field, domain, sphere; scope, extent; reach; range; elbowroom, free scope; play, clearance; field (magn.)│للشك مجاال ترك ما (šakk) to admit of no doubt; للطعن مجال ال فيه (majālan, ṭa‘n) (it is) incontestable; في المجال ھذا in this connection; امامه المجال ودع فسيحا (amāmahū) to give s.o. a free hand, wide scope of action; حيوي مجال (ḥayawī) lebensraum; العمل مجال m. al-‘amal field of activity; مغنطيسي مجال (magnaṭīsī) magnetic field; المجال شدة šiddat al-m. field intensity (magn.)
تجول tajawwul roaming, roving, wandering, migration; going out, moving about; patrol, round; (round) trip, tour; traveling │ التجول منع man‘ at-t. curfew
باعة جائلون pl. jāwil bā’i‘ بائع جاول
peddler, hawker
متجول mutajawwil wandering, migrant, roaming, roving, itinerant; ambulant; traveling; traveler │متجول وكيل traveling salesman; متجول بياع (bayyā‘) peddler,
 hawker; متجول قسيس (qissīs) itinerant preacher
  جوال look up alphabetically
جولف golf golf (eg.)
جام look up alphabetically
جون jūn pl اجوان ajwān gulf, inlet, bay
جونيلة جونال، جونلة، (It. gonnella)gonella pl. -āt (woman’s) skirt (eg.) 149
جاه look up alphabetically
جوھر II tajauhara to become substance
جوھر jauhar pl. جواھر jawāhir  intrinsic, essential nature, essence; content, substance (as opposed to form; philos.); matter, substance; atom; jewel, gem; pl. jewelry │والجوھر الزيف (zaif) the spurious and the genuine
جوھرة jauhara jewel, gem
جوھري jauharī substantial; intrinsic, essential, inherent; fundamental, main, chief, principal; material; jeweler
جوھرجي jauharjī jeweler
مجوھرات mugauharāt (eg.) jewelry, trinkets; jewels, gems
  جوى jawiya a (jawan) to be passionately stirred by love or grief
جوى jawan ardent love, passion
  جاوى look up alphabetically
alphabetically up look جويدار = جاودار
جيء) جاء) jā’a يجيء yajī’u (مجيء majī’) to come (ھ ه، to); to get (ھ to), reach (ھ a place); to arrive; to bring (ب s.th.; ه ب to s.o. s.th.); to bring forth, produce (ب s.th.); to set forth (ب s.th.); to do, perform; to commit, perpetrate (ھ s.th.); to occur, be mentioned, be said (فى in an article, document or book); (with foll. Imperf.) to be about or set out to do s.th. │جريدة فى جاء ان األھرام the newspaper “Al Ahram” reports that ... ; ان باريس من جاء a report from Paris says that ... ; ل مطابقة نتائجه جاءت (muṭābiqatan) its results coincided with ...
جيئة jī’a, jai’a coming, arrival │جيئة وذھاب (dahāb) coming and going, جيئة ذھب وذھابا to pace the floor, walk up and down
مجيء majī’ coming, arrival, advent
الجائيات al-jā’iyāt the things to come
  جيب jaib pl. جيوب juyūb breast, bosom, heart; sine (math.); hole, hollow, cavity, excavation; pocket; purse │ الجيب الخاص(ḳaṣṣ) the privy purse; الجيب تمام tamām al-j., التمام جيب cosine (math.); ساعة الجيب pocket watch; الجيب مصروف pocket money; االنفية الجيوب (anfīya) the nasal sinuses (anat.); المقاومة جيوب j. al- muqāwama pockets of resistance (mil.)
جيبي jaibī pocket (adj.)
jeep j. sayyārat سيارة جيب and jīb جيب jīp, جيب  
چيت (ir.) čīt a colorful cotton fabric, chintz
neck juyūd جيود ajyād, اجياد pl. jīd جيد  
جود see jayyid جيد  
jawādجواد see جياد، اجياد  
  جير jairi surely, truly, verily
  جير jīr lime
جير jīrī calcareous, lime (adj.) جيار jayyār unslaked lime جيارة jayyāra limekiln
  جير II to endorse (fin.)
جيرو (It. giro) endorsement (fin.)
جور see جيرة، جيران  
جيزة gīza Giza (city in N Egypt); a brand of Egyptian cotton
جيش) جاش) jāša i (جيشان jayašān) to be excited, be agitated; to rage, storm; to boil, simmer II to levy troops, mobilize an army X to raise, mobilize (ھ an army, also, e.g., انصارا anṣāran followers)
جيش jaiš pl. جيوش army, troops, armed forces │ االحتالل جيش occupation forces; احتياطي جيش army reserve; مرابط جيش (murābiṭ) territorial army; جيش االنقاذ j. al- inqād Salvation Army; المساء جيش al- masā’ dusk, evening twilight 150
جياش jayyāš agitated, impassioned; excited, boiling up; ebullient; pleasurably excited, happily stimulated
جيشان jayašān excitement, agitation; raging
جيف) جاف) jāfa i, II and V to be putrid, stink (decaying cadaver)
 جيفة jīfa pl. جيف jiyaf, اجياف ajyāf corpse, cadaver
چيكى čīkī Czech
جيل jīl pl. اجيال ajyāl people, nation, tribe; generation; century; epoch, era
جيالتي (It. gelati) jēlātī ice cream
جيم jīm name of the letter ج
جين (Fr. gaine) corselet, sheath corset (eg.)
الجيوغرافيا │ geography jiyogrāfiyā جيوغرافيا anthropogeography (bašarīya) البشرية
جيوفيزيا jiyofīziyā geophysics
السنة │ geophysical jiyofīziyā’ī جيوفيزيائي year geophysical the (sana) الجيوفيزيائية
جيوفيزيقي jiyofīzīqī geophysical
جيولوجيا jiyolōjiyā geology
جيولوجي jiyolōjī geologic(al)
ح

حاء ḥā’ name of the letter ح
rabbi chief the الحاخام االكبرrabbi│ ḥāḳām حاخام
حول see حؤول
حامى ḥāmī Hamitic
حين see حانة and حان
حانبة (pronounced ḥamba) pl. حوانب ḥawānib  (formerly Tun.) hamba, palace gendarme of the Bey of Tunis
حنو see حانوت
  حب ḥabba i (ḥubb) to love, like II to evoke ( الى in s.o.) love or a liking (ھ ه، for s.th. or s.o.), make (الى s.o.) love or like (ھ ه، s.th. or s.o.); to endear (ھ الى s.th. to s.o.), make (ھ s.th.) dear, lovable, attractive (الى for s.o.), make (ھ s.th.) palatable, acceptable ( الى to s.o.); to urge (ھ الى s.th. on s.o.), suggest (الى s.th. to s.o.) IV (حب ḥubb, محبة maḥabba) to love, like (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to wish, want, or like, to do s.th. (ان احب│(ان uḥibbu an I should like to ... ; ان له احب to like about s.o. that he ... ; له الخير يحب ال (ḳaira) he doesn’t want him to be happy, he grudges him everything V to show love, reveal one’s affections (الى to s.o.); to endear o. s. (الى to s.o.), make o.s.
popular, ingratiate o.s. (الى with s.o.); to court, woo (الى a woman) VI to love one another X to like (ھ s.th.); to deem (ھ s.th.) desirable, recommendable; to prefer (ھ على s.th. to s.th. else)
حب ḥubb love; affection, attachment │ الذات حب ḥ. ad-dāt self-love, amour-propre; االستطالع حب curiosity, inquisitiveness; حب الوطن ḥ. al-waṭan patriotism; ل حبا (ḥubban) out of love or affection for, out of friendship for; في حبا in the desire to …
حبي ḥubbī friendly, amicable, loving; حبيا ḥubbīyan in an amicable manner, amicably; by fair means (jur.)
حب ḥibb pl. احباب aḥbāb darling, dear, dearest (one)
حباب ḥabāb aim, goal, end 151
حبيب ḥabīb pl. احباء aḥibbā’ , احبة aḥibba, احباب beloved, sweetheart, lover; darling; dear one, friend; dear (الى to s.o.); popular; االحباب the beloved ones, the dear ones
ḥabā’ib  حبائب pl. labība حبيبة
sweet·heart, darling, beloved woman
احب aḥabb  dearer, more desirable, preferable (الى to s.o.)
حبذا ḥabbadā (with foll. Nominative) how nice, how lovely is ... ! how good, excellent, perfect is …! │ لو حبذا how nice it would be if …; فعل لو الحال حبذا h. l-ḥālu lau fa‘ala it would be nice, or he would do well, if he did it; الحال حبذا يا (ḥālu) that’s just wonderful!
محبة maḥabba love; affection, attachment │الوطن محبة m. al-waṭan patriotism
تحبب taḥabbub courtship, wooing
تحابب taḥābub mutual love, concord, harmony
محبوب maḥbūb beloved; dear; lovable, desirable; popular; favorite; beloved one, lover; (pl. محابيب maḥābīb ) gold piece, sequin (in Ottoman times; eg.)
محبوبة maḥbūba sweetheart, darling, beloved woman
محبب muḥabbab agreeable, pleasant, desirable, lovable, dear (الى to s.o.); nice, likable
 محب muḥibb pl. -ūn loving; lover; fancier, amateur, fan; friend │الناس محب philanthropic(al), affable; العزيز محبنا our
dear friend; اآلثار محبو friends of archeology;
لذاته محب (li-datihī) egoist
متحاب mutaḥābb loving one another, concordant
مستحب mustaḥabb (re)commendable, desirable (said of acts whose neglect is not punished by God, but whose performance is rewarded; Isl. Law); well-liked, popular
  حب II to produce seed, go to seed (plant); to bear seed (grain); to granulate, become granulated; to granulate (ھ s.th.) IV to produce seed
حب ḥabb (coll.; n. un. ة) grains; seed; -- pl. حبوب ḥubūb grain, cereals, corn; seed(s); grains, kernels; granules; pellets; pills, pastilles; berries; acne, pustules, pimples│العزيز حب chufa (Cyperus esculentus L.; bot.); الفقد حب ḥ. al-faqad chaste tree (Vitex agous castus L.; bot.); croton seeds (seeds of Croton tiglium; bot.); (magr.) cherries; الھال حب ḥ. al-hāl and (الھان حب (حبھان ḥ. al-hān cardamom (Amomum cardamomum L.; bot.); حب الغمام ḥ. al-gamām hail, hail-stones
حبة ḥabba (n. un.; see also حب ḥabb) pl.
-āt grain, granule; seed; kernel; pill, pastille; berry; pustule, pimple; triviality, trille; a square measure (Eg.; = 58.345 m ); pl. حبات beads (of the rosary)│حبة شعير ḥ. ša‘īr a linear measure (Eg.; =
0.205 cm); حلوة حبة (ḥulwa) aniseed; حبة سوداء (saudā’) black caraway (Nigella sativa L.; bot.); الرمال حبات grains of sand; العين حبة ḥ. al-‘ain eyeball; pupil (of the eye); القلب حبة ḥ. al-qalb dearest one, beloved, darling
حبب ḥabab blister
حبيبة ḥubaiba pl. -āt little grain, small kernel; small pimple or pustule
حبيبي ḥubaibī granular, granulated│ الرمد الحبيبي (ramad) trachoma (med.)
حبحب ḥabḥab (coll.) watermelon (hij.)
حباحب ḥubāḥib firefly, glowworm
حبذ II to approve, think wall (ھ of s.th.), commend (ھ s.th.); to applaud, acclaim, cheer (ه s.o., ھ s.th.)
حب   see حبذا
تحييذ taḥyīd approval; acclamation, acclaim, applause, cheering 152
حبر ḥabara u (ḥabr) to gladden, make happy, delight (ه s.o.); -- ḥabira a (حبور ḥubūr) to be glad, happy II to embellish, refine, make workmanlike (ھ s.th.); to compose ( ھ s.th.) in elegant style; to write, compose (ھ s.th.)
حبر ḥibr ink│الحبر ام umm al-ḥibr squid, cuttlefish; ورق على حبر (waraq) mere ink on paper, of no effect (e.g., an agreement, a treaty)
حبر ḥabr, ḥibr pl. احبار aḥbār a non- Muslim religious authority, 1earned man, scribe; hishop; rabbi│االعظم الحبر the Pope; االحبار سفر sifr al-a. Leviticus (Old Test.)
قداس حبري│ pontifical ḥabrī حبري
(quddās) pontifical mass (Chr.)
حبرية ḥabrīya office or dignity of a bishop, bishopric, pontificate
حبرة ḥabara, ḥibara pl. -āt silken shawl or wrap (worn in public by ladies)
حبار ḥabār, ḥibār pl. -āt mark, trace (esp. of blows), welt, wale
حبورḥubūr joy
ḥubārayāt حباريات pl. ḥubārā حباري
bustard (zool.)
يحبور yaḥbūr bustard chick (zool.)
محبر miḥbara, maḥbara pl. محابر
maḥābir  inkwell
حبس ḥabasa i (ḥabs) to obstruct, shut off, confine (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), block, bar, hold back, check (ھ s.th. عن from; also tears, laughter, etc.); to withhold (عن ھ from s.o. s.th.); to hold in custody, detain (ه s.o.) to apprehend, arrest, jail, imprison (ه s.o.); to keep, keep back, put aside, put away (على ھ s.th. for); to tie up, invent inalienably (ھ capital) │على نفسه حبس to devote o.s. entirely to ... ; عن يده حبس (yadahū) to take (s.th.) out from under s.o.’s power; حبس انفاسه عليه (anfāsahū) to make s.o. catch his breath, take s.o.’s breath away; مع حبس
 الشغل ḥubisa ma‘a š-šugl he was committed to prison under hard labor II to tie up inalienably (ھ funds, على for, esp. for a pious purpose), make a religious bequest (ھ, for the benefit of على) VII to be held back, be held up, stop, be interrupted, intermit; to restrain o.s., hold back VIII to block, obstruct, bar, confine ( ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to detain, hold in custody ( ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to hold back, retain, suppress (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to be detained, held up; to be impeded, held back; to falter, break, fail (voice), stop (breath)
حبس ḥabs (act of) holding or keeping back, obstruction, check, repression; blocking off, barring, confinement; damming up, staving off; safekeeping, custody, retention; imprisonment, arrest, detention, jailing; (pl. حبوس ḥubūs) prison, jail │احتياطي حبس (iḥtiyāṭī) detention (pending investigation); انفرادي حبس (infirādī) solitary confinement; شديد حبس penal servitude
حبس ḥibs pl. احباس dam, weir, barrage
حبس ḥubs, ḥubūs pl. احباس aḥbās (Tun., Alg. Mor. = waqf) inalienable property the yield of which is devoted to pious purposes, religious bequest, (Fr. jur.) “habous”│عام حبس (‘āmm) public habous, خاص حبس (ḳaṣṣ) private habous; حبسا كان على وقفا كان = ) على) to be entirely dependent on …
حبسة ḥubsa speech defect, impediment of speech
حبيس ḥabīs blocked-off, shut-off, barred, confined, locked-up; secluded; bated (breath); choking (voice); (pl. حبساء ḥubasā’ ) hermit
محبس maḥbas, maḥbis pl. محابس maḥābis  place where s.th. is confined or locked up; jail, prison; (prison) cell 153
محبس miḥbas device for shutting off or blocking off
محبسة maḥbasa hermitage
انحباس inḥibās seclusion, confinement; stoppage, interruption; cessation
احتباس iḥtibās retention, restraint; inhibition, impediment, obstruction,
stoppage │البول احتباس iḥtibās al-baul
suppression of urine, ischuria
محبوس maḥbūs shut-off (from the outside world), isolated, secluded, confined, locked-up; imprisoned, captive; tied-up (funds); (pl. محابس maḥābis ) prisoner, prison inmate, convict
محبس muḥabbis donor of a habous (see
حبس ḥubs)
عليه المحبس al-muḥabbas ‘alaihi beneficiary of a habous (see حبس ḥubs)
منحبس munhabis secluded, shut-off
الحبش al-ḥabaš Abyssinia, Ethiopia; (pl. االحباش
al-aḥbāš) the Abyssinians, Ethiopians
)بالد الحبش (and al-ḥabaša الحبشة
Abyssinia, Ethiopia
aḥbāš احباش pl. ḥabašī الحبشي
Abyssinian, Ethiopian
حبط ḥabaṭa i (حبوط (ḥubūṭ) and ḥabiṭa a to come to nothing, fail, miscarry, go wrong; to be futile, be of no avail, be lost IV to frustrate, thwart, foil, defeat (ھ s.th., ھ على in s.th. s.o.; negotiations, efforts, an attempt, etc.)
حبط ḥabaṭ scar of a wound, wale, welt
حبوط ḥubūṭ futility, failure
احباط aḥbāṭ frustration, thwarting, foiling
حبق ḥabaq basil (bot.); (eg.) a variety of speedwell (Veronica anagallis aquatica L.)
حبك ḥabaka i u (ḥabk) to weave well and tight (ھ s.th.); to braid, plait (ھ s.th.); to twist, twine, tighten (ھ s.th.); to knit (ھ s.th.); to devise, contrive (ھ a plan, a plot) II to twist, twine, tighten (ھ s.th.) to fasten (ھ s.th.)
حبكة ḥabka fabric, tissue; texture, structure
حبك ḥubuk: p. النجوم حبك ḥ. an-nujūm the orbits of the celestial bodies
حباكة ḥibāka weavers trade, weaving
محبوك maḥbūk tightly woven; tight, taut; sturdy, strong, robust, husky
محتبك muḥtabik interwoven, intersecting
  حبل VIII to ensnare, catch in a snare (ه ، ھ
s.o., s.th.)
 حبل ḥabl pl. حبال ḥibāl, احبل aḥbul, حبول ḥubūl, احبال aḥbāl rope, cable, hawser; cord, string, thread; (pl. حبال ḥibāl) beam, ray (e.g., of the sun, of light), jet (e.g., of water); vein; sinew, tendon │الوريد حبل jugular vein; السري الحبل (surrī) umbilical cord; الشوكي الحبل (šaukī) spine; صوتية حبال (ṣautīya) vocal cords; المساكين حبل ivy (bot.); الماء حبال jets of water; (اطلق) القى الغارب على الحبل alqā (aṭlaqa) l-ḥabla ‘alā l-gārib to let things go, slacken the reins, give a free hand, impose no restraint; الحبل ارتخاء slackening of the reins, yielding; relenting; حبله اضطرب iḍṭraba ḥabluhū to get into a state of disorder, of disorganization, of disintegration, get out
of control; الحبلين على تعب  (la‘iba, ḥablain) to play a double game, work both side, of the street
احبولة uḥbūla pl. احابيل aḥābīl  snare, net; rope with a noose; pl. احابيل tricks, wiles, artifices, stratagems (in order to get s.th.)
حبالة ḥibāla pl. حبائل ḥabā’il  snare, net
حابل ḥābil: بالنابل الحابل اختلط (iḳtalaṭa) everything became confused, got into a state of utter confusion; ونابلھم حابل all together, all in a medley 154
  حبل ḥlabila a (ḥabal) to be or become pregnant, conceive and IV to make pregnant ( ھاa woman)
حبل ḥabal conception; pregnancy
حبالنة and ḥabālā حبالى pl. ḥublā حبلى
ḥablāna pregnant
حبن ḥabana dropsy
الھان حبب) حبھان ḥabb al-hān) cardamom (Amomum cardamomum L.; bot.)
حبو) حبا) ḥabā u (ḥabw) to crawl, creep: to present (ه ھ s.o. with s.th.), give, award (ھ ه to s.o. s.th.) III to be obliging (ه to s.o.), show one’s good will (ه toward s.o.); to favor (ه s.o.); to side (ه with s.o.), be partial (ه to s.o.); to show respect, deference (ه to s.o.) VIII to sit with one’s legs drawn up and wrapped in one's garment
حبوة ḥibwa, ḥubwa, ḥabwa gift, present
حباء ḥibā’ gift, present
محاباة muḥābāh obligingness complaisance, courtesy; favor(ing), favoritism, partiality
حت ḥatta u (ḥatt) to rub off, scrape off, scratch off (ھ s.th.)
حتة ḥitta pl. ḥitat (eg.) piece, bit, morsel
حتى ḥattā (prep.) until, till, up to, as far as; (conj.; with perf.) until, so that; (with subj.) until, that, so that, in order that; -- (particle) even, eventually even; and even; لو حتى even if; (with preceding negation) not even, and be it only…
حتات ḥutāt scraps; morsels, crumbs
تحات taḥāt corrosion
حتد ḥatida a (ḥatad) to be of pure origin
محتد maḥtid descent, origin, lineage
حترة ḥutra small piece, bit, trifle
حتار ḥitār pl. حتر ḥutur border, edge, fringe, surroundings, vicinity
حتف ḥatf pl. حتوف ḥutūf death │يسعى) عن يبحث بظلفه حتفه (الى yabḥatu ‘an (yas‘ā ilā) ḥatfihī bi-ẓilfihī he brings about his own destruction, digs his own grave; حتف مات انفه māta ḥatfa anfihī he died a natural death
حتم ḥatama i (ḥatm) to decree, make necessary, prescribe (ھ على s.th. for s.o.), make (ھ s.th.) a duty, a necessity (على for s.o.); to impose, enjoin (ھ على s.th. upon s.o.); to decide, determine definitely (ب s.th.) II to decree, make necessary, prescribe (ھ على s.th. for s.o.), make (ھ s.th.) a duty, a necessity (على for s.o.) V to be necessary; to be s.o.’s (على) duty, be incumbent (على upon s.o.)
حتم ḥatm pl. حتوم ḥutūm imposition, injunction; final decision, resolution, determination; حتما ḥatman decidedly, definitely, neceaoarily, inevitably
حتمي ḥatmī decided, definite, final, conclusive, definitive, unalterable, irrevocable, inevitable
حتمية ḥatmīya decidedness, definiteness, definitiveness, determinateness, unalterableness; necessity
حتمية ال lā-ḥatmīya indeterminism (philos.)
 محتوم maḥtūm imposed, enjoined, obligatory; determined, definitive, determinate, unalterable, ineviroble; destined, predestined, ordained (fate)
محتم muḥattam imposed, enjoined, obligatory; determined, definitive, determinate, unalterable, inevitable; destined, predeotined, ordained (fate)
متحتم mutaḥattim absolutely necessary; imperative (duty)
حت see حتى
  حث ḥatta u (ḥatt) to urge, incite, prompt, goad, spur on, egg on, prod, provoke, 155 impel (ه s.o., على to do s.th.) │خطاه حث (ḳuṭāhū) to quicken one’s pace, hurry (الى to a place); الطريق حث (ṭarīqa) to hurry, hasten; قدميه حث (qadamaihi) to quicken one’s pace, break into a run VIII and X = I
حثيث ḥatīt quick, rapid, quick
حاثة ḥātta hormone
  حثي ḥittī Hittite (n. and adj.)
حثالة ḥutāla dregs, lees, sediment; scum (fig.); offal, discard, scraps │ الحرير حثالة silk combings
حثو) حثا) ḥatā u (ḥatw) to strew, scatter, spread, disperse (ھ s.th.)
حج ḥajja u to overcome, defeat (ه s.o., with arguments, with evidence), confute (ه s.o.); to convince (ه s.o.); -- (ḥajj) to make the pilgrimage (to Mecca), perform the hadj III to dispute, debate, argue, reason (ه with s.o.) VI to argue against each other, carry on a dispute, to debate; to take counsel VIII to advance (ب s.th.) as an argument, plea, excuse, or pretext; to allege in support or vindication, plead (ب s.th.); to vindicate, justify (ل s.th.); to protect, remonstrate (على against), object, raise objections (على to)
حج ḥajj and حجة ḥijja pl. -āt, حجج ḥijaj pilgrimage; hadj, the official Muslim pilgrimage to Mecca │الحجة ذو dū l-ḥijja Zu’lhijjah, the last month of the Islamic calendar
حجة ḥujja pl. حجج ḥūjaj argument; pretense, pretext, plea; proof, evidence; document, writ, deed, record; authority │ ان بحجة under the pretense that …, on the plea … on the pretext of …
حجاج ḥajāj pl. احجة aḥijja circumorbital ring (anat.)
محج maḥajj destination (of a journey)
محجة maḥajja pl. محاج maḥājj  destination of a pilgrimage, object of pilgrimage, shrine; destination (of s journey); goal; road; way; procedure, method │ الصواب محجة m. aṣ-ṣawāb the Right Way, the Straight Path; الحديد محجة railroad
حجاج ḥijāj argument, dispute, debate
تحجج taḥajjuj argumentation, pleading, offering of a pretext, pretense, excuse
احتجاج iḥtijāj pl. -āt argumentation; pretext, excuse, plea, pretense; protest, remonstrance (على against), objection, exception (على to)
حاج ḥājj pl. حجاج ḥujjāj, حجيج ḥajīj pilgrim; hadji, Mecca pilgrim, honorific title of one who has performed the pilgrimage to Mecca
حجب ḥajaba u (ḥajb) to veil, cover, screen, shelter, seclude (ھ على s.th. from); to hide, obscure (ھ عن s.th. from s.th. else, e.g., from sight); to eclipse, outshine, overshadow (ه s.o.); to make imperceptible, invisible (ھ عن s.th. to); to conceal (ھ عن s.th. from s.o.); to make or form a separation (وبين -- بين between – and) II to veil, hide, conceal; to hide from sight, keep in seclusion (ھا a woman); to disguise, mask (ھ ب s.th. with) V to conceal o.s. hide (عن from), flee from sight, veil o.s. VII to veil o.s., conceal o.s.; to be covered up, become hidden be obscured VIII to vanish, become invisible, disappear from sight; to veil conceal (عن hide; to become hidden, be concealed (عن from); to withdraw; to elude perception; to ease or interrupt publication (newspaper, periodical)
حجب ḥajb seclusion; screening off; keeping away, keeping off
حجاب ḥijāb pl. حجب ḥujub, احجبة aḥjiba cover, wrap, drape; curtain; woman’s veil; screen, partition, folding screen; barrier, bar; diaphragm (also الحاجز الحجاب; anat.); amulet
حجابة ḥijāba office of gatekeeper
 احتجاب iḥtijāb concealment, hiddenness, seclusion; veiledness, veiling, purdah
حاجب ḥājib concealing, screening, protecting; (pl. حجاب ḥujjāb, حجبة ḥajaba) doorman, gatekeeper; chamberlain; orderly (Syr., mil.); (pl. حواجب ḥawājib ) eyebrow │الھواء حاجب ḥ. al-hawā’ airtight, hermetic
محجوب maḥjūb concealed, hidden, veiled
  حجر ḥajara u (ḥajr, ḥijr, ḥujr, حجران ḥijrān, ḥujrān) to deny access (على to s.o.); to stop, detain, hinder (على or ه s.o.); to forbid, interdict (ھ على s.th. to s.o.), prohibit (على s.o.) from doing s.th. (ھ); to place (على s.o.) under guardianship, declare (على s.o.) legally incompetent
حجر ḥajr restriction, curb(ing), check(ing), obstruction, impeding, limitation, curtailing (على of s.th.); barring, closing, debarment, preclusion; detention; blocking, confinement, containment, suppression (as a protective measure); interdiction, prohibition, ban; revocation, or limitation, of s.o.’s (على) legal competence │حجرصحي (ṣiḥḥī) quarantine
حجر (ḥijr forbidden, interdicted, prohibited; lap; (pl. احجار aḥjār, حجور ḥujūr, حجورة ḥujūra) mare
حجرة ḥujra pl. ḥujarāt, حجر ḥujar room; cell; (railroad) compartment; chamber │ االنتظار حجرة waiting room; النوم حجرة ḥ. an- naum bedroom; الفالحية الحجرة (fallāḥīya) chamber of agriculture
حجر maḥjar pl. محاجر maḥājir  military hospital, infirmary; prison, jail, dungeon
│صحي محجر (ṣiḥḥī) quarantine, quarantine station
حجر maḥjir, miḥjar, maḥjar pl. محاجر maḥājir  (=العين محجر m. al-‘ain) eye socket; see also below
تحجير taḥjīr interdiction, prohibition, ban; see also below
محجور maḥjūr pl. محاجر maḥājir  (and عليه محجور) one placed under guardianship; minor; ward, charge
  حجر II to petrify, turn into stone (ھ s.th.); to make hard as stone (ھ s.th.) V to turn to stone, petrify, become petrified
حجر ḥajar pl. احجار aḥjār, حجارة ḥijāra, حجار ḥijār stone; weight (placed as an equipoise on the scale of a balance) │ االساسي الحجر (asāsī) the foundation stone, cornerstone, االساسي الحجر وضع (waḍ‘) laying of the cornerstone; البالط حجر ḥ. al- balāṭ flagstone, paving stone; جھنم حجر ḥ. jahannam lunar caustic, silver nitrate; حجر الجير ḥ. al-jīr limestone; السماقي الحجر or السماقي حجر (summāqī) porphyry; الحجر االسود (aswad) the Black Stone (of the Kaaba); الشادنة حجر hematite (min.); حجر العثرة ḥ. al-‘atra stumbling block; حجر الفالسفة philosopher’s stone; O القمر حجر ḥ. al-qamar selenite; كريم حجر and ثمين حجر precious stone, gem; الحجر على طبع (tab‘) lithograph; الحجر طباعة Lithography
العصر│ (adj.) stone stony, ḥajarī حجري العصر الحجري Age; Stone the (‘aṣr) الحجري العصر الحجري period; Neolithic the الحديث period Paleolithic the القديم
حجير ḥajīr stony, petrified
حجار ḥajjār stone mason, stone cutter
محجر maḥjir pl. محاجر maḥājir  (stone) quarry
تحجير taḥjīr petrification; stone quarrying
تحجر taḥajjur petrification متحجر mutaḥajjir petrified مستحجر mustaḥjir petrified 157
حجدز ḥajaza u i (ḥajz) to hold back, restrain, hinder, prevent (ھ عن s.th. from); to keep away (ھ عن s.th. from); to block (off), close, bar; to isolate, insulate, confine, seclude; to make inaccessible; to set apart; to separate (بين two things); to arrest, detain; to seize, sequester, impound (على or ھ s.th., e.g., s.o.’s property, salary); to confiscate, safeguard (ھ s.th.); to reserve (ھ s.th.); to make a reservation (ھ for a. theater seat, a steamer cabin, a ticket, etc.) VIII to retain for o.s., reserve to o.s. (ھ s.th.)
حجز ḥajz curbing, prevention, restraint; seclusion, confinement, containment, isolation, insulation, separation; arrest, detention, seizure, confiscation, sequestration (على of s.th.); reservation (of seats) │الحرية حجز ḥ al-ḥurrīya deprivation
 of liberty, unlawful detention duress (jur.); على الحجر القى (alqā) to confiscate s.th.
الحجاز al-ḥijāz Hejaz, region in W Arabia, on the Red Sea coast
حجازي ḥijāzī of or pertaining to Hejaz; pl. -ūn) an inhabitant of Hejaz
حاجز ḥājiz and حاجزة pl. حواجز ḥawājiz  obstacle, hindrance, impediment, obstruction; partition, screen, dividing wall j block, blockade, road block; fence, gate, railing, balustrade; hurdle; bar, barrier; barricade │ الحاجز الحجاب diaphragm (anat.); O االمواج حاجز breakwater; الجمركية) القمرقية الحواجز) (qumruqīya, gumrukīya) customs barriers;
rod lightning حاجزة الصواعق O
حاجز موظف muwaẓẓaf ḥājiz approx.: bailiff
  محاجفةmuḥājafa singlestick fencing
اجحاف = iḥjāfاحجاف  
حجل ḥajala u i (ḥajl, حجالن ḥajalān) to hop, leap; to skip, gambol
aḥjāl احجال ḥujūl, حجول pl. ḥijl ḥajl, حجل
anklet
حجل ḥajal (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. حجالن ḥajlān, حجلى ḥijlā partridge; mountain partridge, mountain quail
حجل ḥajala pl. حجال ḥijāl curtained canopy, or alcove, for the bride │ رباط الحجال rabbāṭ al-ḥ. the ladies
الحجلة لعبة la‘bat al-ḥajala hopscotch
محجل muḥajjal wearing anklets (woman); white-footed (horse); bright, brilliant, radiant; unique, singular, esp. in the phrase محجل أغر (agarr )
حجم ḥajama u (ḥajm) to cup (ه s.o.; med.) IV to recoil, shrink, flinch (عن from); to desist, abstain, refrain (عن from), forbear (عن s.th.); to withdraw, retreat
حجم ḥajm pl. حجوم ḥujūm, احجام aḥjām bulk, size, volume; caliber (of a cannon)
│الحجم كبير bulky, sizable, massive
حجام ḥajjām cupper
حجامة ḥijāma cupping, scarification, art of cupping
محاجم pl. miḥjama محجم m miḥjam, محجم
maḥājim  cupping glass
احجام iḥjām desistance, abstention; restraint, aloofness, reserve
حجن ḥajana i (ḥajn) to bend, curve, crook (ھ s.th.) VIII to snatch up, grab (ھ s.th.) take hold (ھ of s.th.)
احجن aḥjan  curved, crooked, bent
محجن miḥjan pl. محاجن maḥājin  staff or stick with a crooked end, crosier; hook
حجو) خيرا به حجا) ḥajā bihī ḳairan to think well of s.o., have a good opinion of s.o. III to propose a riddle (ه to s.o.); to speak in riddles, be enigmatic
حجى ، حجا ḥijan pl. احجاء aḥjā’ intellect, brains, understanding, discernment, acumen, sagacity, wit, intelligence 158
حجي ḥajiy appropriate, suitable, proper (
ب for)
احجى aḥjā more appropriate, more suitable, more proper; more correct, better
aḥājin احاج aḥājīy, احاجى pl. uḥjīya احجية
riddle, puzzle, enigma
حخام ḥaḳām = حاخام (look up alphabetically)
حد ḥadda u (ḥadd) to sharpen, hone (ھ a knife); to delimit, delineate, demarcate, mark off, stake off (ھ land, من from); to set bounds (ھ to s.th.), limit, restrict, confine (ھ s.th.); to impede, hinder, curb, check (من or ھ s.th.); -- i (حدة ḥidda) to become furious, angry (على at): -- i u (حداد ḥidād) to wear mourning, mourn (على the deceased) II to sharpen, hone (ھ a knife); to forge (ھ s.th.; syr.); to delimit, demarcate (ھ s.th.); to set bounds (ھ to s.th.), circumscribe, mark off, delineate sharply; to limit, restrict, confine (من or ھ s.th.); to determine, appoint, assign, schedule, lay down, set down, establish (ھ s.th.); to fix). e.g., prices); to define (ھ s.th.) │بصره حدد (baṣarahū) to dart sharp glances; to scrutinize (في s.th.), look sharply (في at s.th.) III to oppose (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) act contrary (ه ھ، to s.o., to s.th.), contravene, counteract, violate (ھ s.th.) IV to sharpen, make sharp (ھ s.th.) │ النظر احد الى (naẓar) to look sharply at, stare at; احد بصره (baṣarahū) to dart sharp glances; to scrutinize (في s.th.), look sharply (في at
 s.th.); بصره من احد (baṣarihī) to glance sharply; -- to put on garments of mourning V to be delimited, be delineated, be bounded, be circumscribed; to be determined, be established, be set down, be scheduled, be fixed; to by defined, be definable VIII to be or become angry; to become infuriated, be furious (على at), be exasperated (على with); to be agitated, be upset, be in a state of commotion
حد ḥadd pl. حدود ḥudūd (cutting) edge (of a knife, of a sword); edge, border, brink, brim, verge; border (of a country), boundary, borderline; limit (fig.), the utmost, extremity, termination, end, terminal point, terminus; a (certain) measure, extent, or degree (attained); (math.) member (of an equation), term (of a fraction, of a proportion); divine ordinance, divine statute; legal punishment (Isl. Law) │لحد li-ḥaddi or الى حد until, till, up to, to the extent of, حد الى اآلن لحد اآلن، li-ḥ. l-āna up to now, so far; ما حد الى (ḥaddin) to a certain degree, to a certain extent; بعيد حد الى كبير، حد الى to a considerable extent or degree, considerably, extensively; حد أي الى (ayyi
ḥaddin) how far, to what degree or extent; له حد ال (ḥadda) boundless, infinite, unbounded, unlimited; حد بال bi-lā ḥaddin,
حد غير الى ilā gairi ḥaddin boundless, unlimited, without limits; سواء حد على ‘alā ḥaddin sawā’, سوى حد على ‘alā ḥaddin siwan in the same manner; equally, likewise; حد على (ḥaddi) according to, commensurate with; ذاته حد في fī ḥaddi dātihī and ذاته بحد in itself, as such; الحد االعلى (a‘lā), االقصى الحد (aqṣā) the maximum; االدنى الحد (adnā) the minimum; (عمري حد ‘umrī) age limit; حدين ذو dū ḥaddain two-edged; حدود في (ḥudūdi) within, within the framework of; اقصى بلغ حدوده (aqṣā ḥudūdihI) to attain its highest degree; ﷲ حدود the bounds or restrictions that God has placed on man's freedom of action
حدة ḥidda sharpness, keenness; pitch (of a tone); distinctiveness, markedness; vehemence, violence, impetuosity; fury, rage, wrath, ire, anger; excitability, irascibility, passionateness
وحد see ḥida حدة
حدد ḥadad forbidden 159
حداد ḥidād (act of) mourning (على over)
│ الحداد ثوب taub al-h.□ garmente of mourning; البالط حداد ḥ. al-balāt court mourning
حديد ḥadīd iron; pl. حدائد ḥadā’id  iron parts (of a structure); forgings, hardware, ironware │ خام حديد crode iron, pig iron, iron ore; O مطاوع حديد (mutāwi‘) wrought iron; غفل حديد (gufl) unprocessed iron, pig iron; الحديد ظھر ẓahr al-ḥ. الظھر حديد cast iron; الحديد سكة sikkat al-ḥ. railroad; ضرب بريد حديد في see ضرب
حديد ḥadīd pl. حداد ḥidād, احداء aḥiddā’ , احدة aḥidda sharp (knife, eye, tongue, etc.), keen (mind)
احد aḥadd  sharper, keener; more vehement, more violent
حديدة ḥadīda pl. حدائد ḥadā’id  piece of iron; object or tool made of iron │ حديد الحرث ḥ. al-ḥart plowshare; الحديدة على (eg.) in financial straits, pinched for money
سكة حديدية │ (adj.) iron ḥadīdī حديدي
(sikka) railroad
الحديدة al-ḥudaida Hodeida (seaport in W Yemen)
حداد ḥaddād ironsmith, blacksmith حدادة ḥidāda smithcraft, art smithing تحديد taḥdīd pl. -āt limitation,
delimitation; delineation, demarcation; restriction, curb, confinement; determination, fixation, appointment; definition │التحديد على and التحديد وجه على (wajh) to be exact …, strictly speaking …
حاد ḥādd sharp (also, fig., of a glance), keen (mind); high-pitched (tone); vehement, fiery, impetuous; fierce; vivid; acute (illness) │المزاج حاد ḥ. al-mizāj, حاد الطبع ḥ. aṭ-ṭab‘ hot-blooded, hot-headed, hot-tempered, irascible; حادة زاوية (zāwiya) acute angle; الحد تحت subacute
محدود maḥdūd bounded, bordered (ب by); circumscribed, confined; limited (= small, e.g., number, knowledge, etc.); delimited, determinate, fixed, definite, definitive │المعنى محدود m. al-ma‘nā unambiguous; الضمان محدود  m. aḍ-ḍamān
 of limited liability; المسئولية) محدودة شركة) (širka) limited company, corporation
محدد muḥaddad sharpened, sharp; determined, fixed, appointed, destined (ل for) strictly delimited, clearly defined
محتد muḥtadd angry, furious, exasperated
ḥid’ān حدآن ḥidā’, حداء ḥida’, حدأ pl. ḥid’a, حدأة
kite (zool.)
حدأة ḥada’a pl. حداء ḥidā’ double-bladed axe
حدب ḥadiba a (ḥadab) to be convex, dome- shaped, cambered, bent outward; to be hunchbacked; to be nice, kind, friendly ( على or ب to s.o.). be solicitous (على or ب about s.o.), care (على or ب for s.o.) take care (على or ب of s.o.) II to make convex, emboss, camber, vault, curve, crook, bend (ھ s.th.) V and XII احدودب iḥaudaba to be crooked, vaulted, cambered, embossed, convex
حدب ḥadab affection, fondness, love; kindliness; solicitude, care; (pl. حداب ḥidāb, احداب aḥdāb) elevation of the ground │ وصوب حدب كل من (wa-ṣaubin) or وحدب صوب كل from all sides, from all directions, from everywhere; صوب كل في وحدب everywhere, in every quarter, on all sides
حدب ḥadib curved, cambered, vaulted, convex; hunchbacked; kindly, friendly
حدب ḥadaba hunchback, hump; camber, vaulting, curvature
احدب aḥdab , f. حدباء ḥadbā’, pl. حدب ḥudb hunchbacked, humped; -- (elative) kindlier, friendlier
محدب muḥaddab embossed; cambered, convex 160
حدث ḥadata u (حدوث ḥudūt) to happen, occur, take place, come to pass; -- (ḥaduta u ( حداثة ḥadāta) to be new, recent; to be young II to tell, relate, report (ه to s.o., ب or ھ s.th., عن في، about); to speak, talk (ه to s.o., عن or في about, of) │قلبه حدثه (ḥaddatahū qalbuhū and نفسه حدثته ḥaddatathu nafsuhū his heart, his innermost feeling told him (ب s.th.); حدث ب نفسه (nafsahū) to talk o.s. into (s.th.), try to believe s.th. or see s.th. (as factual); to
resolve, make up one’s mind to do s.th.; ان نفسه حدث he said to himself, told himself that … III to speak, talk (عن or ه في to s.o. about s.th.); to discuss (عن or ه في with s.o. s.th.), converse (عن or ه في with s.o. about); to negotiate, confer (ه with s.o.) to
address, accost (ه s.o.); to call up (ه s.o., by telephone) IV to bring forth, produce, create, originate (ھ s.th.); to found, establish (ھ s.th.); to bring about, cause, occasion, provoke, effect (ھ s.th.); to drop excrement │ حدثا احدث (ḥadatan) to bring about s.th.; to cause or do s.th., esp., s.th. evil, do mischief V to speak, talk (الى to s.o., ب عن، or j about or of s.th.), converse, chat (الى or مع with s.o., عن to, ب or j about s.th.) VI to talk with one another, converse, have a conversation X to renew (ھ s.th.) to buy new (ھ s.th.); to introduce, start, invent, originate, create (ھ s.th.); to find or deem (ه s.o.) to be young
حدث ḥadat pl. احداث aḥdāt a new, unprecedented thing, a novelty, innovation; event, incident, occurrence, happening; phenomenon; evil symptom; misdeed; misfortune; ritual impurity (Isl. Law); excrement, feces; (pl. حدثان احداث، ḥudtān) young man, youth; احداث juveniles
حديث ḥadīt pl. حداث ḥidāt, حدثاء ḥudatā’  new, novel, recent, late; modern; حديثا ḥadītan recently, lately │البناء حديث ḥ. al- binā’ new-built, recently built; السن حديث ḥ. as-sinn young; العھد حديث ḥ. al-‘ahd of recent date, recent, new, young; العھد حديث ب عھد حديث ب، (ḥ. ‘ahdin) having adopted or acquired (s.th.) recently; not long accustomed to (s.th.), inexperienced at (s.th.), new at (s.th.), newly, e.g., العھد حديث بالوالدة (bi-l-wilāda) newborn, الغھد حديث بالزواج (bi-z-zawāj) newly wed; حديث كان بأوربا العھد he had not known Europe until recently
حديث ḥadīt pl. احاديث aḥādīt , حدثان ḥadtān speech; chat, chitchat, small talk; conversation, talk, discussion; interview; prattle, gossip; report, account, tale, narrative; Prophetic tradition, Hadith, narrative relating deeds and utterances of the Prophet and his Companions │ حديث خرافة ḥ. ḳurāfa fabulous story, silly talk; قدسي حديث (qudsī) Muslim tradition in which God Himself speaks, as opposed to
 نبوي حديث (nabawī) an ordinary Prophetic tradition; النفس حديث ḥ. an-nafs s.th. one talks o.s. into; premonition
حدوث ḥudūt setting in (of a state or condition), occurrence, incidence (of a phenomenon); occurrence, incident, happening
حداثة ḥadāta newness, recency, novelty; youth, youthfulness
احداث aḥdāt  newer, more recent
الدھر حدثان  ḥidtān (or ḥadatān) ad-dahr
misfortune, adversities, reverses
احدوثة uḥdūta pl. احاديث aḥādīt  speech; discussion, talk, conversation; chatter; fabling, fibbing; topic, subject of a conversation; gossip, rumor (about a person) │االحدوثة حسن ḥusn al-u. praise (of s.o.) االحدوثة سوء sū’ al-u. slander, defamation
محادثة muḥādata pl. -āt discourse, conversation, discussion, talk, parley
احداث iḥdāt production, creatuion, invention, origination; causation, effectuation 161
احداثيات iḥdātīyāt (pl.) co-ordinates (math.) │ عمودية احداثيات (‘amūdīya) ordinates; أفقية احداثيات (ufuqīya) abscissas (math.)
استحداث istiḥdāt invention, creation, production, origination
حادث ḥādīt occurring, happening, taking place; new, recent; fresh; -- (pl. حوادث ḥawādit , also -āt) occurrence, incident, event, happening; episode; case (jur.) accident, mishap │ تزوير حادث a case of forgery; الحادث مكان makān al-ḥ. site of action, scene of the crime, locus delicti
حادثة ḥādita pl. حوادث ḥawādit  occurrence, event, happening; plot (of a play) ; incident, episode; accident, mishap
│ المرور حادثةḥ. al-murūr traffic accident
محدث muḥaddit pl. -ūn speaker, talker; spokesman; conversation partner, interlocutor; relator, narrator; a transmitter of Prophetic traditions, traditionary, representative of the science or study of Hadith (see above); O phonograph, gramophone
متحدث mutaḥaddit spokesman, speaker
مستحدث mustaḥdat new, novel, recent, -- (pl. –āt) novelty, innovation; recent invention, modern product; neologism
حدج ḥadaja i and II to stare, look sharply (ه ھ، at s.o., at s.th., often with ببصره bi- baṣarihī or بنظره bi-naẓarihī)
aḥdāj احداج ḥudūj, حدوج pl. ḥidj حدج
load, burden, encumbrance
stork ḥadīj abū ابو حديج
حداجة ḥidāja pl. حدائج ḥadā’ij  camel saddle
حدر ḥadara, ḥadura u (ḥadr, حدارة ḥadāra) to be thick; -- ḥadara u i (ḥadr, حدر ḥudūr) to bring down, lower (ھ s.th.) to cause (ھ s.th.) to descend; to drop (ھ s.th.); to shed (ھ tears); حدرا حدر (ḥadran) to rattle off, express quickly (an utterance, a thought);
-- (ḥadr) to come down, step down, descend; to glide down, swoop II to drop ( ھ s.th.) to lower, inclines, dip (ھ s.th.) V to descend gradually; to glide down; to come down, descend; to flow down (tears); to derive, stem, originate (من from) VII to come or go down, descend; to glide down, sink down; to be in decline, be on the downgrade, to decline, wane; to flow down (tears); to slope down, slant down, be inclined (terrain); to come (الى to a place), arrive (الى at)
حدر ḥadr rapid recitation of the Koran (a terminus technicus of tajwīd)
حدور ḥadūr slope, downgrade, declivity, declivitous terrain
تحدر  taḥaddur descent, slant, slope, inclination, incline, declivity
انحدار inḥidār slant, dip, pitch, inclination, decent, slope; declivity; fall (of a river); decline, waning; ruin, decay, decadence
حادر ḥādir thick
متحدر mutaḥaddir descending, slanting, sloping downward
منحدر munḥadir descending; lowered, dipped; slanting, sloping, declivitous (terrain); declining, waning, being on the downgrade, in a state of decadence or
 decline; run-down, seedy, down-at-the- heels, down-and-out
منحدر munḥadar pl. -āt depression; slope, talus, incline, descent, declivity; fall (of a river)
حدس ḥadata i u (ḥadt) to surmise, guess, conjecture (ھ s.th.)
حدس ḥadt surmise, guess, conjecture; O intuition 162
(syr.) حذاف(، حداف الماكوك( ḥaddāf حداف□ (weaving) shuttle
□ حدافة طارة ṭāra ḥaddāfa (syr.) flywheel
  حدق ḥadaqa i (ḥadq) to surround, encircle, encompass (ب s.o., s.th.); (with بعينه
bi-‘ainihī) to look, glance (ه at s.o.) II to look, glance, gaze, stare (الى or في at, also في النظر حدق │ (ب(naẓara) to fix one’s glance on … IV to surround, encircle, encompass, enclose (ب s.o., s.th.); to look, glance (الى في، or ب at) │ في النظر النظر احدق (naẓara) to fix one’s glance on …
حدقة ḥadaqa pl. -āt, حدق ḥadaq, حداق ḥidāq, احداق aḥdāq pupil (of the eye); pl. احداق glances
حديقة ḥadīqa pl. حدائق ḥadā’iq  garden │ الحيوانات حديقة ḥ. al-ḥayawānāt zoological garden, zoo
احداق iḥdāq encirclement, encompassment (ب of)
محدق خطر ḳaṭar muḥdiq imminent danger
 □ حدق II (=حدق) to make acid, sour, tart, or sharp (ھ s.th.)
□ حادق ḥādiq (= حاذق) sour, tart, acid, sharp (taste)
حدل ḥadala i to flatten, level, even, roll (ھ s.th.); (ḥadl, حدول ḥudūl) to treat unjustly ( على s.o.)
محدلة miḥdala pl. محمدل maḥādil  roller, steamroller
حدم VIII to burn, glow, blaze; to burn up, be consumed by fire; to flare up, break out (fight); to be furious, burn with wrath (على at, over), also غيظا احتدم (gaiẓan)
احتدام iḥtidām paroxysm
محمدم muḥtadim furious, infuriated, enraged
وحد see ḥida حدة
  □ حدوة ḥidwa horseshoe
 (حدو and حدا (حدى ḥadā u (ḥadw, حداء ḥudā’, ḥidā’ to urge forward by singing (ھ camels); to urge, spur on, egg on, prompt, instigate, induce, move (ب or ه s.o., الى to s.th., to do s.th.); ب حدا to instigate s.th.; to sway, rock, roll (rider, camel); to swing along, rock along (in riding) │الحديث بھم حدا الى their conversation led them to …; غرض الركائب اليه تحدى (garaḍun tuḥdā) a goal much sought after or worth striving for V to compete, vie (ه with s.o.); to challenge, provoke (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to defy, oppose, resist, withstand (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), stand up (ه ھ، against s.o., against s.th.) to incite, stimulate, arouse, animate, sharpen (ھ s.th.; ذكاءه dakā’ahū s.o.’s intellect); to intend (ھ s.th., to do s.th.), be bent (ھ on doing s.th.)
حداء ḥudā’ animating singsong, chanting of the caravan leader
حداء ḥaddā’ camel driver, cameleer
احدوة uḥduwa, احدية uḥdīya song of the camel drivers
تحد taḥaddin pl. تحديات taḥaddiyāt
challenge, provocation
حاد ḥādin pl. حداة ḥudāh caravan leader (who urges the camels forward by singing); camel driver, cameleer; leader
متحد mutaḥaddin challenger, provoker
  حدي ḥadiya a to remain, stay (ب at a place), stick (ب to a place)
احد see حادى عشر  
  □ حداية ḥidāya, ḥiddāya = حدأة ḥid’a
حذر ḥadira a (ḥidr, ḥadar) to be cautious, wary, to beware (من or ه ھ، of s.o., of s.th.), be on one’s guard (من or ه ھ، against) II to warn, caution (ه من s.o. of or about), put (ه s.o.) on his guard (من against) III to watch out, be 163 careful; to be on one’s guard (ه against), be wary (ه of s.o.) V to beware, be wary (من of) VIII
= I
 حذر ḥidr and ḥadar caution, watchfulness, alertness, wariness, circumspection; precaution │حذره اخذ (ḥadarahū) to be on one’s guard; جذر على ‘alā ḥadarin cautiously, warily; on one’s guard (من against)
حذر ḥadir cautious, wary
حذاري ḥadārī beware (ان of doing …, من of s.th.)! watch out (من for)! be careful (من of)!
تحذير taḥdīr warning, cautioning (من of, against)
محاذرةmuḥādara caution, precaution, precautionary measure
محذور maḥdūr that of which one should beware, against which one should guard; object of caution; -- (pl. -āt) danger, peril; trouble, difficulty, misfortune
حذف ḥadafa i (ḥadf) to shorten, clip, curtail (ھ or من s.th.); to take s.th. away, cut s.th. off, clip s.th. off (من from s.th.), reduce (من s.th.), strike or cross s.th. (من off s.th.); to cancel, strike out, delete, drop, leave out, omit, suppress (ھ s.th.); (gram.) to elide, apocopate, drop by aphaeresis; to deduct, subtract (ھ s.th.); to throw (ه ب at s.o. s.th.), pelt (ه ب s.o. with s.th.); to cast away, throw away, discard (ب s.th.) II to clip, trim (ھ s.th.); to give (ھ s.th.) shape, to trim, clip, or cut (ھ s.th.) into proper shape
حذف ḥadf shortening, curtailing, cutting off, trimming, etc.; canceling, cancellation, striking off, crossing off, deletion; omission, dropping, suppression; (gram.) elision, ellipsis, apocopation
حذافير ḥadāfīr : بحذافيره اخذه he took all of it, he took it lock, stock and barrel
حذق ḥadiqa a, ḥadaqa i (ḥidq, حذاقة ḥadāqa) to be skilled, skillful, well-versed, proficient (ھ or في in s.th.), master (ھ s.th.); -- ḥadaqa u (حذوق ḥudūq) to turn sour (milk) V to feign skillfulness, proficiency, cleverness or smartness
حذق ḥidq and حذاقة ḥadāqa skill, dexterity, proficiency; smartness, cleverness, intelligence; perspicacity, sagacity, acumen
حاذق ḥādiq pl. حذاق ḥuddāq skillful, skilled, proficient; well-versed, clever, smart; intelligent; sour
حذلق II taḥadlaqa to pretend to be clever or skilful, feign skiIl or knowledge; to be pedantic
حذلقة ḥadlaqa skillfulness, dexterity
حذو) حذا) ḥadā u: حذوه حذا (ḥadwahū) to imitate s.o., take after s.o., follow s.o.’s example III to be opposite s.th. (ھ) face, parallel (ھ s.th.), run parallel (ھ to) VI to be opposite each other, be parallel VIII to imitate, copy (ب or على s.o. s.th., also ھ s.th.), take or follow (ب or على s.o., s.th., also ھ s.th.) as an example or model; to be shod; to wear (ھ s.th.) as footgear
حذو ḥadwa (prep.) opposite, face to face with │بالنعل النعل حذوك ḥadwaka n-na‘la bi- n-na‘li in a completely identical manner, to a T, like two peas in a pod
حذاء ḥidā’ pl. احذية aḥdiya shoe; sandal
shoemaker صانغ األحذية│
حذاء ḥidā’a (prep.) and بحذاء bi-ḥidā’i
opposite, face to face with
حذاء ḥaddā’ shoemaker, cobbler
على (في) محاذاة ‘alā (fī) muḥādāti along, alongside of, parallel to
احتذاء iḥtidā’ imitation, copying
محاذ muḥādin opposite, facing
حر ḥarra u i (ḥarr, حرارة ḥarāra) to be hot II to liberate (ه s.o.); to free, set free, 164 release (ه s.o.); to emancipate (ه s.o.); to consecrate (ه s.o.) to the service of God; to clarify, clear up, make clear (ه s.th.); to formulate precisely, phrase accurately, define exactly, pinpoint (ھ s.th.); to revise (ھ a book); to edit, redact (ھ a book, a periodical); to write, pen, indite, compose, compile (ھ s.th.) V to become free; to be freed, be liberated (من from); to be emancipated VIII to be kindled, be heated, flare up
حر ḥarr heat, warmth
حر ḥurr pl. m. احرار aḥrār, pl. f. حرائر ḥarā’ir  noble, free-bom; genuine (jewels, etc.), pure, unadulterated; free; living in freedom; freeman; independent; free unrestrained; liberal (pol.; االحرار the
 Liberals); frank, candid, open (على toward s.o.); free, available, uninvested (money)
│الحر االحتياط (ihtiyaṭī) free reserves, unencumbered reserves; ماله حر من min ḥurr mālihī with his own cash, with funds at his disposal
حرة ḥarra pl. -āt stony area; volcanic country, lava field
حرية ḥurrīya pl. -āt freedom, liberty; independence, unrestraint, license (e.g., poetic) │ العبادة حرية ḥ. al-‘ibāda freedom of worship; الفكر حرية ḥ. al-fikr freedom of thought; الكالم حرية ḥ. al-kalām freedom of speech; النشر حرية (or الصحافة) ḥ. an-našr (aṣ-ṣiḥafa) liberty of the press
)حراير( ḥarā’ir  حرائر pl. silk; ḥarīr حرير (ṣaḳrī) حرير صخري│ silks wares, silken rayon حرير صناعي asbestos;
حريري ḥarīrī silken, silky, of silk
حرائري ḥarā’irī silken, silk- (in compounds), of silk; silk weaver
حرار ḥarrār ssailk weaver
حرارة ḥarāra heat; warmth; fever heat, fever; temperature; ardor, fervor (of emotion), passion; eagerness, enthusiasm, zeal; vehemence, violence, intensity; burning (of the skin)
حريرة ḥuraira pl. -āt calorie
حراري ḥarārī thermal, thermic, thermo-, heat (used attributively); caloric │وحدة حرارية (waḥda) calorie
O حرارية ḥarārīya pl. -āt calorie
حرور ḥarūr f., pl. حرائر ḥarā’ir  hot- wind
حران ḥarrān , f. حرى ḥarrā, pl. حرار ḥirār, حرارى ḥarārā thirsty; passionate, fervent, hot (fig.) │حرى زفرة (zafra) a fervent sigh; حرى دموع hot tears
احر aḥarr  hotter, warmer │من احر على الجمر (jamr) on pins and needles, on tenterhooks, in greatest suspense or excitement
O محر miḥarr heating system, heating installation
تحرير taḥrīr liberation; release; emancipation; record(ing), writing; editing, redaction; editorship (of a
newspaper, a periodical); (pl. -āt, تحارير taḥārīr ) piece of writing, record, brief, document │ التحرير رئيس editor-in-chief; التحرير ادارة board of editors, editorial staff
تحريري taḥrīrī liberational; emancipational; liberal; recorded in writing, written, in writing
حار ḥār hot; warm; ardent, glowing, fervent, passionate
محرور maḥrūr hot-tempered, hot- headed, fiery, passionate, furious
محرر muḥarrir pl. -ūn liberator, emancipator; writer, clerk; editor (of a newspaper, of a periodical)
محرر muḥarrar consecrated to God; let down in writing, recorded in writing, written; booked; pl. محررات booking, entries
متحرر mutaḥarrir emancipated; an advocate of emancipation 165
حرب ḥariba a (ḥarab) to be furious, enraged, angry III to fight, combat (ه s.o.) battle, wage war (ه against s.o.) VI to fight (one another), be engaged in war VIII = VI
warfare; war, ḥurūb حروب pl. f., (ḥarb حرب على( enemies enemy, battle; combat, fight, war; civil (ahlīya) حرب اھلية │ s.o.) of ل or الحروب feud; press (ṣiḥāfīya) حرب صحافية الحرب Crusades; the (ṣalībīya) الصليبية (‘ālamīya), الحرب العالمية (‘uẓmā), العظمى كشفت I; War World (‘āmma) الحرب العامة sāqihā ‘an il-ḥarbu kašafat الحرب عن ساقھا ‘alā il-ḥ. qāmat قامت الحرب على ساق and broke fighting fierce up, flared war sāqin out
حربي ḥarbī warlike, bellicose, belligerent, martial, war (adj.), military; (pl. -ūn) warrior, soldier, military man │ الحربي البوليس (būlīs) military police
حربة ḥarba pl. حراب ḥirāb lance, spear; spearhead; bayonet, sidearm
ḥarābīy حرابى pl. ḥirbā’ حرباء
chameleon (zool.)
حرباه وا wā ḥarabāh! (exclamation of lament) alas! goodness no! oh my!
محراب miḥrāb pl. محارب maḥārib  a recess in a mosque indicating the direction of prayer, prayer niche, mihrab
 محاربة muḥāraba struggle, combat, fight, battle; warfare
احتراب iḥtirāb mutual struggle
محارب muḥārib warring, belligerent; warrior, combatant, fighter; corporal (Eg. 1939)
المتحاربون al-mutaḥāribūn the belligerents, the warring parties
حربوشة ḥarbūša pl. حرابش (ḥarābiš  (tun.) pastille, pill
حرث ḥarata i u (ḥart) to plow (ھ the soil); to cultivate, till (ھ the ground)
حرث ḥart plowing, tilling, tillage, cultivation of the soil; arable land, tilth; plantation, culture
حرثة ḥarta (n. un.) arable land, tilth
حراثة ḥirāta cultivation of the soil, farming, agriculture
حراث ḥarrāt plowman
محراث miḥrāt pl. محارث maḥārit  plow
│ plowman ḥurrāt حراث pl. ḥārit حارث lion l-ḥārit abū ابو الحارث
حرج ḥarija a (ḥaraj) to be close, tight narrow; to be straitened, be confined, get into a strait, be cornered, be hard pressed; to be oppressed, be anguished (heart); to be forbidden (على to s.o.) to narrow, tighten, straiten (ھ s.th.); to complicate (ھ s.th.), make (ھ s.th.) difficult; to forbid (ھ على s.th. to s.o.); to persist (J in s.th.) IV to narrow, straiten, confine, cramp. hamper, impede, restrict (ھ s.th.); to complicate, make difficult, aggravate, jeopardize (ھ situation, s.o.’s position); to embarrass (ه s.o.); to coerce, constrain, press (ه الى s.o. to); to forbid (ھ على s.th. to s.o.) V to refrain from sin or evildoing; to abstain, refrain (من from), avoid (من s.th.); to be cornered, be forced to the wall; to become or be oppressed, anguished, distressed; to become critical, become complicated or difficult, be aggravated (situation), be jeopardized (s.o.’s position) │صدره تحرج ب) من) (ṣadruhū) to feel depressed by, feel annoyed at; الناس به تحرج this made things difficult for people
حرج (ḥaraj closeness, tightness, narrowness; confinement, straitness.
constriction, crampedness; restriction, impediment; oppression, distress, anguish; difficulty; critical situation; prohibition, interdiction; s.th. forbidden, s.th. interdicted, sin │حرج ال (ḥaraja) there is no 166 objection; عليك حرج ال nothing stands in your way, you are at liberty
حرج ḥaraj (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. -āt, حرج ḥirāj, احراج aḥrāj thicket; dense forest; woodland, timberland
حرج ḥarij narrow, close, tight, confined, straitened; oppressed, hard pressed, harassed; critical (situation, position)
احرج aḥrāj  narrower, closer, tighter, more straitened; more critical
حراج ḥarāg (eg.) auction
حراجة ḥarāja seriousness, gravity, difficulty, complicatedness (of a situation)
تحريج taḥrīj forestation, afforestation
حرج taḥarruj restraint, reserve, aloofness; timidity, diffidence, faint- heartedness; critical complication, gravity, difficulty (of a situation)
حرج muḥarrijāt: االيمان محرجات m. al- aimān binding, committing, or solemn, oaths
محرج muḥrij disconcerting, embarrassing
متحرج mutaḥarrij: الصدر متحرج m. aṣ- ṣadr annoyed, vexed, anguished, oppressed
حرد ḥarida a (ḥarad) to be annoyed, disgruntled, angry, furious (على at, with)
ḥardān حردان and ḥarid حرد ḥārid, حارد
annoyed, disgruntled, angry, furious
حرذون ḥardaun pl. حراذين ḥarādīn  lizard
حرز ḥaraza u (ḥarz) to keep, guard, protect, preserve (ھ s.th.), take care (ھ of); -- ḥaruza u (حرازة ḥarāza) to be strong be strongly fortified, be impregnable IV to keep, preserve, guard (ھ s.th.); to obtain, attain, achieve, win (ھ s.th.) │ نصرا احرز انتصارا)) (naṣran) to win a victory; احرز السبق قصب (qaṣaba s-sabq) to come through with flying colors, carry the day, score a great success V to be wary (من of),
 be on one’s guard (من against) VIII to be wary (من of), guard, be on one’s guard (من against), be careful, take heed, take precautions
حرز pl. احراز aḥrāz fortified place; refuge, sanctuary, retreat; custody; (pl. حروز احراز،) amulet
حريز ḥarīz strongly fortified, guarded; inaccessible, impregnable
احراز iḥrāz acquisition, acquirement, obtainment, attainment, achievement, winning, gaining
احتراز iḥtirāz pl. -āt caution, wariness, prudence, circumspection; reservation, reserve │االحتراز بكل with all reservation
O حارزة ḥāriza fuse (el.)
محرز muḥriz obtainer, acquirer, winner, gainer; possessor, holder (على of s.th.)
حرس ḥarasa u (ḥars, حراسة ḥirāsa) to guard, watch, control (ھ ه، s.th., s.o.); to oversee, supervise, superintend (ھ ه، s.th., s.o.); to secure, protect, safeguard, preserve, keep ( ھ ه، s.th., s.o.); to watch (على over) V and VIII to beware, be wary (من of), guard, be on one’s guard (من against)
حرس ḥaras watch; guard, escort; bodyguard │السيار الحرس (sayyār) militia, "garde mobile" (syr.) │الشرف حرس ḥ. aš- šaraf honor guard; الملكي الحرس (malakī) the royal guard (formerly Ir., Eg.); الحرس الملوكي (mulūkī) (formerly) bodyguard of the Bey (Tun.); الوطني الحرس (waṭanī) the National Guard
حراسة ḥirāsa guarding, watching, control; watch, guard, guard duty; supervision, superintendence; guardianship, tutelage, custody, care, protection; safe conduct, escort; administration; administration of an estate (jur.); sequester │السواحل حراسة coast guard 167
احتراس iḥtirās caution, wariness, prudence; (pl. -āt) precaution, precautionary measure │من احتراسا for protection from or against
حارس ḥāris pl. حرسة ḥarasa, حراس ḥurrās vigilant, watchful; watchman; sentry, sentinel, guard; overseer, supervisor, superintendent; administrator;
guardian, custodian, keeper, protector, tutelary (in compounds) │التركة حارس ḥ. at-tirka administrator of aD estate; حارس
الخواتم keeper of the seal; المرمى حارس ḥ. al- marmā goal keeper; قضائي حارس (qaḍā’ī) sequestrator, receiver (in bankruptcy, in equity); حارس مالك (mal’ak) guardian angel (Chr.); الليل حارس ḥ. al-lail night watchman
محروس maḥrūs guarded, safeguarded, secured; protected (by God; esp. used ss an epithet after the names of cities); المحرسون the children, the family
محترس muḥtaris cautious, wary, careful
حرش ḥaraša i (ḥarš) to scratch (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) II to instigate, prod, incite, provoke, incense (ه s.o.); to set (بين people against each other), sow discord, dissension (بين among) V to pick a quarrel, start a brawl ( ب with s.o.) provoke (ب s.o.)
حروش aḥrāš, احراش pl. ḥurš ḥirš, حرش
ḥurūš forest, wood(s)
حرش ḥariš and احرش aḥraš, rough, coarse, scabrous
ḥarāša حراشة ḥurša, حرشة ḥaraš, حرش
roughness, coarseness, scabrousness
تحريش taḥrīš instigation, prodding, incitement, provocation, agitation, incensement
تحرش taḥarruš provocation, importunity, obtrusion, meddling, uncalled-for interference
حرشف ḥaršaf pl. حراشف ḥarāšif  scales (of fish)
حرص ḥaraṣa i and ḥariṣa a (ḥirṣ) to desire, want, covet (على s.th.); to be intent, be bent (على on); to strive (على for), aspire ( على to)
حرص ḥirṣ greed, avidity, cupidity, covetousness; desire; aspiration, endeavor, wish (على for); avarice │على حرصا in the desire for …, in the endeavor to …; حرصا االرواح على danger! (on warning signs)
حريص ḥarīṣ pl. حراص ḥirāṣ, حرصاء ḥuraṣā’  covetous, greedy, avid, eager ( على for); bent (على on), desirous (على of)
احرص aḥraṣ more covetous, greedier
 حرض II to goad, prod, spur on, egg on, incite, rouse, provoke (ه على s.o. to s.th. or to do s.th.); to instigate, abet, stir up, agitate (
ه على s.o. to or against); O to induce (el.)
تحريض taḥrīḍ incitement, provocation; instigation, abetment, agitation (على to); inflammatory propaganda (على against s.o.); O induction (el.) │ ذاتي تحريض self- induction (el.)
تحريضي taḥrīḍī inciting, instigative, agitative, inflammatory; provocative
حارض ḥāriḍ bad, wicked, evil
محرض muḥarriḍ pl. -ūn inciter, baiter; instigator, abettor; demagogue, rabble rouser; agitator, provocator; O inductor (el.)
متحرض mutaḥarriḍ O induced (el.)
حرف II to slant, incline, make oblique (ھ s.th.); to bend off, up, down or back, turn up, down or back, deflect (ھs.th.); to distort, corrupt, twist, pervert, misconstrue, falsify (ھ s.th.) │عن حرفه موضعه (‘an mauḍi‘ihī) to distort the sense of 168 s.th., rob s.th. of its true meaning V to turn off, branch off, take a turning; to deviate, depart, digress (عن from); to avoid (عن s.th.); to be or become bent off, distorted, corrupted, perverted VII to tum off, branch off, ta.ke a turning; to deviate, depart, digress, turn away (عن from); to slope down, slant, be inclined (terrain); to turn (الى to, toward); to be twisted, be distorted; to be oblique, slanting; to be cocked, rakish (headgear); with ب to make s.th. appear oblique, slanted, or distorted; to be corrupted, perverted │ عن به انحرف to dissuade s.o. from; مزاجه انحرف (mizājuhū) to be indisposed, be ill VIII to do (ھ s.th.) professionally, practice (ھ s.th.) as a profession; to strive for success
حرف ḥarf pl. حرف ḥiraf (cutting) edge (of a knife, of a sword); sharp edge; border, edge, rim, brink, verge; -- (pl. حروف ḥurūf, احرف aḥruf) letter; consonant; particle (gram.); type (typ.) │حرف على irresolute, wavering, on the fence; الفاظه بحروفھا alfāẓuhū bi-ḥurūfihā his words literally; بالحرف or الواحد بالحرف literally, verbatim, to the letter; بحرف حرفا ḥarfan
bi-ḥarfin literally, word for word; وقع
االولى باالحرف (waqqa‘a, ūlā) to initial (e.g., معاھدة mu‘āhadatan a treaty); الحروف االبجدية (abjadīya) the alphabetic letters, the alphabet; مجموعة حروف matter (typ.); الشمسية الحروف (šamsīya) the sun letters (i.e., sibilants, dentals, r, l, n to which the l of the article assimilates), القمرية الحروف (qamarīya) the moon letters (to which the l of the article does not assimilate); حرف الجر ḥ al-jarr preposition (gram.) حرف الخفض ḥ al-ḳafḍ do.; التعريف حرف article (gram.); العطف حرف ḥ al-‘aṭf coordinating conjunction (gram.); االستفھام حرف interrogative particle (gram.); القسم حرف ḥ. al-qasam particle introducing oaths (gram.)
حرفي ḥarfī literal
حرف ḥurf common garden pepper cress (Lepidium sativum L.; bot.)
حرفة ḥirfa pl. حرف ḥiraf profession, occupation, vocation, business, craft, trade
حريف ḥarīf pl. حرفاء ḥurafā’  customer, patron, client (tun.)
حريف ḥirrīf pungent, acrid (taste); حريفات
spicy food, delicacies
حرافة ḥarāfa pungency, acridity (taste)
تحريف taḥrīf pl. -āt alteration, change; distortion; perversion, corruption, esp. phonetic corruption of a word
انحراف inḥirāf pl. -āt deviation, digression; obliqueness, obliquity, inclination, slant; declination (astrom.); ailment, indisposition, also المزاج انحراف
احتراف iḥtirāf professional pursuit (of a trade, etc.)
محرف muḥarraf corrupted (word)
منحرف munḥarif oblique; slanted, slanting, sloping, inclined; distorted, perverted, corrupted, twisted; deviating, divergent; trapezium (geom.)
محترف muḥtarif one gainfully employed (ب in), person doing s.th. (ب) professionally; professional, a pro (sports); professional (adj.), e.g., صحافي محترف (ṣiḥāfī) professional journalist; climber, careerist
محترف muḥtaraf pl. -āt studio, atelier
 حرق ḥaraqa i (ḥarq) to burn (ھ s.th.); to burn, hurt, sting, smart │قلبه حرق (qalbahū), pl. قلوبھم حرق (qulūbahum) to vex, exasperate s.o.; -- u (ḥarq) to rub together (ھ s.th.) II to burn (ھ s.th.); اسنانه حرق (asnānahū) to gnash one’s teeth V to burn (ھ s.th.); to destroy by fire (ھ s.th.); to singe, scorch, parch (ھ s.th.); to scald (ھ s.th.); to kindle, ignite, set on fire (ھ s.th.) │ ليله فحمة احرق في(faḥmata lailihī) to spend the night doing 169 (s.th.), burn the midnight oil over… V to burn, be aflame, burn up, take fire, he consumed hy fire, he burned; to be consumed (by an emotion), pine away (ھ with), he pained (ھ by), eat one’s heart out │شوقا تحرق (šauqan) to be overcome with longing or nostalgia VIII to burn, be aflame, burn up, take fire, be consumed by fire, he burned
حرق ḥarq burning, incineration, combustion; kindling, igniting, setting afire; arson, incendiarism; pl. حروق ḥurūq burn (med.)
حرق ḥaraq fire, conflagration
حرقة ḥurqa, ḥarqa burning, incineration, combustion; stinging, smarting, burning (as a physical sensation); torture, torment, agony, pain, ordeal
حراق ḥurāq, ḥurraq tinder
حراق ḥarrāq hurning, aflame, afire; hot
ḥarā’iq  حرائق pl. حريقة and ḥarīq حريق
fire; conflagration
O حراقة ḥarrāqa torpedo
حرقان ḥaraqān burning, stinging, smarting (as a painful sensation; e.g., of the feet)
O محرق maḥraq pl. محارق maḥāriq 
focus (phys.)
تحاريق taḥārīq  (Eg.) season of the Nile’s lowest water level, hottest season of the year
احراق burning, incineration, combustion
تحرق taḥarruq buming, combustion; burning desire
احتراق iḥtirāq burning, combustion; fire, conflagration │O االحتراق غرفة gurfat al-i. combustion chamber (techn.); االحتراق قابل qābil al-i. combustible
حارق ḥāriq arsonist, incendiary
محروق maḥrūq burned, charred, scorched, parched; reddish, hronze- colored; pl. محروقات maḥrūqāt fuel │ فخار محروق(faḳḳār) fired clay
(qunbula) قنبلة محرقة muḥriq: محرق
incendiary bomb
O محرق muḥraq crematory
محرقة maḥraqa burnt sacrifice
حرقد ḥarqada pl. حراقد ḥarāqid  Adam’s apple
حرقفة ḥarqafa pl. حراقف ḥarāqif  protruding part of the hipbone
حرك II to move, set in motion, drive, propel, operate (ھ s.th.); to march, move (ه troops); to stir (ھ s.th.); to start, get started, get underway (ھ s.th.); to agitate, excite, stimulate (ھ s.th.); to incite, instigate, goad, prod, provoke, actuate, urge (ه على s.o. to do s.th.); to awaken, arouse, foment, stir up (ھ s.th.); to vowel, vowelize (gram., ھ a consonant) │حرك مشاعره (mašā‘irahū) to grip, excite, thrill s.o.; العواطف حرك to affect the feelings, be touching, moving, pathetic; ساكنا يحرك ال (sākinan) he doesn’t budge, he doesn’t hend his little finger, he remains immobile, apathetic; ساكنه حرك (sākinahū) to rouse s.o., put s.o. in a state of excitement, commotion or agitation V to move, be in motion, stir, hudge; to start moving, get moving; to start out, get underway (traveler); to depart, leave (train); to put out, to sail (fleet); to he set in motion, be driven, be operated; to be agitated, be excited, be stimulated; to be awakened, be roused, be fomented, be provoked, be caused
حرك ḥarik lively, active, brisk, agile, nimble
حركة ḥaraka pl. -āt movement, motion; commotion; physical exercise; stirring, impulse; proceeding, procedure, policy; action, undertaking, enterprise; military 170 operation; continuation, progress; traffic (rail, ohipplng, otreet); movement (as a social phenomenon); vowel (gram.)
his all in (sakanātihī) في حركاته وسكناته│ حركة المرور situation; every in doings; shipplng حركة المراكب traffic; (through)
 traffic; البضائع حركة exchange of goods; األموال حركة turnover (com.); النسوية الحركة (niswīya) feminist movement; الحركة خفيف nimble, lithe, light, quick, agile, adroit; الحركة ثقيل slow in motion, heavy-handed, clumsy, sluggish, lumbering, inert, indolent
O حركي ḥarakī kinetic (phys.) حراك ḥarāk movement, motion محرك maḥrak path, trajectory (of a
projectile)
محراك miḥrāk poker, fire iron
تحريكي taḥrīkī dynamic
تحرك taḥarruk pl. -āt movement, motion; forward motion; start; departure; sailing (of a fleet)
حارك ḥārik withers
محرك muḥarrik mover, stirrer; rouser, inciter, fomenter, awakener, agent; instigator; -- (pl. -M) motive, springs, incentive, spur, motivating circumstance, causative factor; motor, engine (tech.)
متحرك mutaḥarrik moving, movable, mobile; pronounced with following vowel, voweled, vowelized (consonant; gram.) │متحركة صور (ṣuwar) movies, motion pictures
حركث ḥarkata (and حركش ḥarkaša) to stir up, agitate, excite, thrill
حرم ḥaruma u, ḥarima a to be forbidden, prohibited, interdicted, unlawful, unpermitted (على to s.o.); -- ḥarama i (ḥirm, حرمان ḥirmān) to deprive, bereave, dispossess, divest (ه ھ or ه من s.o. of s.th.) take away, withdraw, withhold (ه ھ or ھ من or ه form s.o. s.th.), deny, refuse (ه ھ or من ھ or ه من to s.o. s.th.); to exclude, debar, preclude, cut off (ه ھ or ه من s.o. from s.th.); to excommunicate (ه s.o.) II to declare (ھ s.th.) sacred, sacrosanct, inviolable, or taboo, to taboo (ھ s.th.); to declare (ھ s.th.) unlawful, not permissible, forbid, interdict, proscribe (ھ s.th., j. to s.o.); to render (ه s.o.) immune or proof ( من against), immunize (ه من s.o. against) │ نفسه على حرمه to deny o.s. s.th., abstain, refrain from s.th. IV to excommunicate (ه s.o.; Chr.); to enter into the state of ritual consecration (esp., of a Mecca pilgrim;
see احرام iḥrām) V to be forbidden, interdicted, prohibited; to be holy, sacred, sacrosanct, inviolable VIII to honor, revere, venerate, esteem, respect (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) │نفسه احترم to be self-respecting X to deem (ھ s.th.) sacrosanct, sacred, holy, inviolable; to deem (ھ s.th.) unlawful or unpermissible
حرم ḥirm excommunication (Chr.)
حرم ḥaram p1. احرام aḥrām forbidden, prohibited, interdicted; taboo; holy, sacred, sacrosanct; s.th. sacred, sacred object; sacred possession; wife; sanctum, sanctuary, sacred precinct; الحرمان the two Holy Places, Mecca and Medina │ثالث الحرمين tālit al-ḥaramain the third Holy Place, i.e., Jerusalem
حرمة ḥurma pl. -āt, ḥurumāt, ḥuramāt holiness, sacredness, sanctity, sacrosanctity, inviolability; reverence, veneration, esteem, deference, respect; that which is holy, sacred, sacrosanct, inviolable, or taboo; -- (pl. حرم ḥuram) woman, lady; wife
حرام ḥarām pl. حرم ḥurum forbidden, interdicted, prohibited, unlawful; s.th. forbidden, offense, sin; inviolable, taboo; sacred, sacrosanct; cursed, accursed │ابن حرام ibn ḥ. illegitimate son, bastard; 171 الحرام االراضي no man’s land; neutral territory; الحرام البيت (bait) the Kaaba; الشھر الحرام (šahr) the Holy Month Muharram; الحرام المسجد (masjid) the Holy Mosque in Mecca; عليك حرام you mustn’t do (say) that! بالحرام illicitly, illegally, unlawfully
حرام ḥirām pl. -āt, احرمة aḥrima a woolen blanket (worn as a garment around head and body)
حريم ḥarīm pl. حرم ḥurum a sacred, inviolable place, sanctum, sanctuary, sacred, precinct; harem; female members of the family, women; wife
حريمي ḥarīmī women’s (in compounds), for women
حروم ḥurūm pl. -āt excommunication (Chr.)
حرامي ḥarāmī pl. -īya thief, robber, bandit
 حرمان ḥirmān deprivation, bereavement, dispossession (of s.o., من of s.th.) debarment, exclusion, preclusion (من from); excommunication (CHr.); privation │االرث حرمان ḥ. al-irt exclusion from inheritance, disinheritance (Isl. Law)
محرم maḥram pl. محارم maḥārim  s.th. forbidden. inviolable, taboo, sacrosanct, holy, or sacred; unmarriageable, being in a degree of consanguinity precluding marriage (Isl. Law)
maḥārim  محارم pl. maḥrama محرمة
handkerchief
تحريم taḥrīm forbiddance, interdiction, prohibition, ban
احرام iḥrām state of ritual consecration of the Mecca pilgrim (during which the pilgrim, wearing two seamless woolen or linen sheets, usually white, neither combs nor shaves, and observes sexual continence); garments of the Mecca pilgrim
احترام iḥtirām pl. -āt deference, respect, regard, esteem, reverence; honoring (e.g., of a privilege); pl. honors, respects, tributes
محروم maḥrūm deprived, bereaved, bereft (من of); excluded, precluded, debarred (من from); suffering privation (as opposed to مرزوق); excommunicated (Chr.)
محرم muḥarram forbidden, interdicted; Muharram, name of the first Islamic month; الحرام محرم m. al-ḥarām honorific name of this month
محرم muḥrim Mecca pilgrim who has entered the state of ritual consecration (see احرام iḥrām)
محترم muḥtaram honored, revered, venerated, esteemed, respected; (in the salutation of letters:) my dear …; venerable, reverend; notable, remarkable, considerable
حرمل ḥarmal African rue (Peganum harmala L.; bot.)
حرمل ḥarmala pl. حرامل ḥarāmil  loose wrap worn over the shoulders (garment of the dervishes)
حرن ḥarana, ḥaruna u (حرن ḥiran, ḥuran) to be obstinate, stubborn, headstrong
حرون ḥarūn pl. حرن ḥurun obstinate, stubborn, refractory, reluctant, resistant
حارون ḥārūn brazior
حروة ḥarwa burning; wrath, rage; acridity, pungency (of taste); pungent, disagreeable odor
حرى V to seek, pursue (ھ s.th.), strive (ھ for), asplre (ھ to); to examine, investigate (ھ s.th.); to inquire (عن or ھ into), make inquiries (عن or ھ about); to be intent (ھ on s.th.), take cars (ھ of s.th.), attend (ھ to s.th., also في), look (ھ after s.th., also في); to see to it (ان that) 172
بالحرى bi-l-ḥarā hardly, barely
حرى ḥarīy pl. احرياء aḥriyā’ adequate, appropriate, suitable (ب for), worthy (ب of s.th.) │ بالذكر حرى (dikr) worth mentioning, considerable; بالتصديق حري credible, believable; بالحري او or to be exact, or rather
احرى aḥrā more adequate, more proper, more appropriate │ باالحرى او or to tell the truth, or more explicitly, or put more exactly, or rather
تحر taḥarrin pl. تحريات taḥarriyāt inquiry; investigation │ التحري شرطة šurṭat at-t. or التحري مصلحة maṣlaḥat al-t. secret police
حز ḥazza u (ḥazz) to notch, nick, incise, indent (في s.th.), make an incision, cut (في into s.th.) II and VIII = I
حز ḥazz pl. حزوز ḥuzūz incision, notch, nick; the right time, the nick of time
حزة ḥazza incision, notch, nick; tim; the right time, the nick of time; predicament, plight
حزاز ḥazāz head scurf, ringworm; tetter, eruption (med.)
حزازة ḥazāza rancor, hatred, hate
محز maḥazz notch, nick │المحز اصاب to find the right solution, hit the nail on the head, hit the mark, strike home
حزب ḥazaba u (ḥazb) to befall (ه s.o.), happen, occur (ه to s.o.) │ االمر حزب the matter became serious II to rally (ه s.o.); to form
 or found a party 111 to side, take sides (ه with), be an adherent (ه of s.o.) V to take sides; to form a party, make common cause, join forces
حزب ḥizb pl. احزاب aḥzāb group, troop, band, gang; party (pol.); the 60th part of the Koran │ احزابه من ھو he belongs to his clique. he is of the ...me breed
حزبي ḥizbī party (adj.), factional
حزبية ḥizbīya party activities; partisanship, partiality; factionalism
حيزبون ḥaizabūn old hag
تحزب taḥazzub factiousness; factionalism
ḥāzib ḥazabahū حزبه حازب ḥāzib: حازب
he met with a mishap
متحزب mutaḥazzib partial, biased; partisan
حزر ḥazara i u (ḥazr, محزرة maḥzara) to estimate, assess, appraise (ھ s.th.); to make a rough estimate (ھ of s.th.), guess ( ھ s.th.)
حزر ḥazr estimation, assessment, appraisal; conjecture, guess, surmise
حزورة ḥazūra riddle, puzzle
محزرة maḥzara estimation, assessment, appraisal; conjecture, guess, surmise
حزيران ḥazīrān June (Syr., Leb., Ir., Jord.)
حزقاني ḥuzuqqānī choleric
hiccups ḥāzūqa حازوقة ḥazūqa, حزوقة
حزم ḥazama i (ḥazm) to tie up, bundle, wrap up, pack, do up in a package or bundle (ھ s.th.); to girth (ھ an animal); to make fast, fasten, tie (ھ s.th.) │ امره حزم (amrahū) to take matters firmly in hand; -- ḥazuma u (ḥazm, حزامة ḥazāma, حزومة ḥuzūma) to be resolute, firm, stouthearted, intrepid II to gird (ه s.o.) V and VIII to be girded; to gird o.s. put on a belt
حزمḥazm packing, packaging, wrapping; determination, resoluteness, firmness, energy; judiciousness, discretion, prudence
حزمة ḥuzma pl. حزم ḥuzam s.th. wrapped up or tied up, bundle, fagot, fascine; beam of rays, radiation beam
(phys.); bunch (of herb., etc.); sheaf; package, parcel
حزام ḥzām pl. -āt, احزمة aḥzima, حزم ḥuzum belt, girth; girdle; cummerbund, 173 waistband (worn over the caftan to fasten it); sword belt │االمن حزام ḥ. al-amn wety belt
احزم aḥzam  more resolute: more judicious
حازم ḥāzim pl. حزمة ḥazama and حزيم ḥazīm pl. حزماء ḥuzamā’ resolute, energetic; judicious, discreet, prudent
حزن ḥazana u to make sad, sadden, grieve (ه s.o.); -- ḥazina a (ḥuzn, ḥazan) to be sad, grieved (ل or على at or because of): to grieve. mourn (على over) II and IV to make sad, sadden, grieve (ه s.o.)
حزن ḥuzn pl. احزان aḥzān sadness, grief, sorrow, affliction
حزن ḥazn pl. حزون ḥuzūn rough, rugged, hard ground
حزن ḥazin sad, mournful, grieved
حزين ḥazīn pl. حزناءḥuzanā’ , حزانى ḥazānā sad; mourning (for a deceased person); sorrowing, mournful, grieved │ الحزينة الجمعة (jum‘a) Good Friday (Chr.)
حزنان ḥaznān  very sad, very grieved, worried; in mourning
□ حزايني ḥazāyinī (حزائني ḥazā’inī) sad, mournful, melancholic; mourning (in compounds), mortuary, funereal │قماش حزايني (qumāš) cloth for mourning garments
تحزن taḥazzun sadness; behavior of a mourner
محزون maḥzūn grieved, grief-stricken, pained, sad, saddened
محزن muḥzin grievous, saddening; sad; melancholic; tragic: محزنات muḥzināt grievous things │ محزنة تمثيلية قصة (qiṣṣa tamtīlīya) and محزنة رواية (riwāya) tragedy (theat.)
حس ḥassa (1  pers. perf. ḥasastu) u (ḥass) to curry, currycomb (ھ an animal); to feel, sense (ھ s.th.); -- ḥassa (1  pers. perf. ḥasistu) a to feel srry, feel sympathy or compassion (ل for), sympathize (ل with),
 II to grope, feel IV to perceive, sense, experience (ھ or ب s.th.); to feel (ھ or ب s.th.); to notice (ھ or ب s.th.); to hear (ھ a sound, a noise, etc.); to take notice (ه of s.o.) V to grope, probe (ھ for s.th.), finger, handle, touch (ھ s.th.), run the hand (ھ over s.th.); to grope about, feel around: to seek information, make inquiries (من about); to sense, experience, perceive (ھ، ب s.th.); to feel (ب s.th.); to be affected, be deeply touched (ب by s.th.)
حس ḥass sensation, perception, feeling, sentiment
حس ḥiss sensory perception, sensation; feeling, sentiment; sense; voice; sound; noise
حسي ḥissī sensory; sensuous; perceptible; palpable │O الحسي المذھب (madhab) sensationalism, sensualism
حسيات ḥissīyāt sensations
حسيس ḥasīs faint noise
حساس ḥassās sensitive; sensible; readily affected, susceptible; sensual (pleasure)
حساسة ḥassāsa sensory organ
امراض حساسية │ allergic ḥassāsī حساسي
allergic diseases, allergies (med.)
حساسية ḥassāsīya sensitivity (also techn.); sensibility; faculty of sensory perception; susceptibility; sensuality │ الحساسية مرض maraḍ al-ḥ. allergy (med.)
محسة miḥassa currycomb
احساس iḥsās pl. -āt, احاسيس aḥāsīs  feel, feeling: sensation, sense (ب of s.th.) perception (ب of s.th.); sensitivity; pl. احساسات feelings, sentiments │O احساس بالنور sensitivity to light; O االحساس شديد ٤٧١ highly sensitive; مشترك احساس (muštarak) feeling of harmony, concord, unanimity; االحساس قلة qillat al-i. insensitivity, dullness, obtuseness
al-iḥsāsīya aṭ-ṭā’ifa الطائفة االحساسية O
the impressionists
حاسة ḥāssa pl. حواس ḥawāss  senastion; sense │ الخمس الحواس the five senses
محسوس maḥsūs felt; sensed; perceptible, noticeable, palpable, tangible; appreciable, considerable (e.g., loss);
المحسوس that which ill perceptible through the senses; appearance, evidence; المحسوسات things perceptible through the senses
حسب ḥasaba u (ḥasb, حساب ḥisāb, حسبان ḥisbān, ḥusbān) to compute, reckon, calculate; to count; to charge, debit (ھ على s.th. to s.o., to s.o.’s account); to credit (ل ھ s.th. to s.o., to s.o.’s account) │ حسب حسابه (ḥisābahū) to take s.th. or s.o. into account or into consideration, reckon with s.th. or s.o., count on s.th. or s.o.; ل حسابا حسب (ḥisāban) do.; to attach importance to
s.o. or s.th.; ل حساب الف حسب (alfa) to hove a thousand apprehensions about …; -- ḥasiba a i (حسبان ḥisbān, محسبا maḥsaba, maḥsiba) to regard (ه ه s.o. as), consider, deem (ه ه s.o. to be …); to think, believe, suppose, assume; to consider, regard (ه من
s.o. as belonging to), count (ه من s.o. among); to see (في ھ in s.o. s.th.); -- ḥasuba u (ḥasab, حسابة ḥasāba) to be of noble origin, be highborn; to be highly esteemed, be valued III to settle an account, get even (with s.o.); to call (ه s.o.) to account, ask (ه s.o.) for an accounting; to hold (ه s.o.) responsible, make (ه s.o.) answerable │ نفسه على حاسب to be careful, be on one’s guard V to be careful, be on one’s guard; to take precautions; to seek to know, try to find out (ھ s.th.) VI to settle a mutual account VIII to debit or credit; to take into account, take into consideration (ب or ھ s.th.); to reckon (ب or ھ with); (to anticipate a reward in the hereafter by adding a pious deed to one’s account with God -- such as resigning in God’s will at the death of a relative; hence:) ولدا احتسب waladan) to give a son, be bereaved of a son; الشيء ﷲ عند احتسب to sacrifice s.th. in anticipation of God’s reward in the hereafter; to charge (ھ على s.th. for); to think, believe, suppose; to take (ه ه s.o. for or to be …); to be content, content o.s.(ب with); to disapprove (ھ على s.th. in s.o.), take exception (ھ على to s.th. in s.o.), reject (ھ على s.th. in s.o.); to call (على s.o.) to account, ask (على s.o.) for an accounting
حسب ḥasb reckoning, computing, calculation; thinking, opinion, view; sufficiency │درھم (بحسبك) حسبك ḥasbuka
 (bi-ḥasbika) dirhamun one dirham is enough for you; ان حسبك it suffices to say that …; you know enough when you hear that …; you need only ... ; ان مقنعا بحسبك (muqni‘an) it will be enough to convince you if …; شرا كله بھذا وحسبك (bi-hādā kullihī šarran) but enough of all these negative aspect! فحسب fa-ḥasb and that’s all, and no more, only (interchangeable with فقط)
حسبي ḥasbī حسبي مجلس (majlis) pl. مجالس حسبية guardianship court, probate court (Eg.)
حسب ḥasab pl. احساب aḥsāb measure, extent, degree, quantity, amount; value; esteem, high regard enjoyed by s.o.; noble descent; ḥasaba (prep.), بحسب bi-ḥasabi and حسب على ‘alā ḥasabi according to, in accordance with, commensurate with, depending on
حسبما ḥasbamā (conj.) according to what ... , as, depending on how … │حسبما اتفق (ttafaqa) as chance will have it
حسبة arithmetical problem, sum 175
حسيب ḥasīb pl. حسباء ḥusabā’  respected, esteemed; noble, of noble birth, highborn
حسبان ḥusbān calculation, reckoning, accounnting; computation │الحسبان في كان to be taken into account, be taken into consideration; to be expected, be anticipated; ان الحسبان في كان it was expected that ... ; ان حسباني I expect that …
حساب ḥisāb arithmetic, reckoning, calculus; computation; calculation, estimation, appraisal; accounting, settlement; consideration, consideratedness; caution; -- (pl. -āt) bill, invoice; statement of costs (bank) account; pl. حسابات bookkeeping │حساب الجمل ḥ. al-jummal (al-jumal) use of the alphabetic letters according to their numerical value; الحساب علم ‘ilm al-ḥ. arithmetic; التفاضل حساب ḥ. al-tafāḍul differential calculus; التكامل حساب ḥ. at- takāmul integral calculus; حسابه في كان he reckoned with it, he expected it, he was prepared for it; له حسابا عمل to take s.o. or s.th. into consideration; to reckon with s.o. or s.th.; الختامي الحساب (ḳitāmī) and حساب
نھائي (nihā’ī) final statement of account, final accounting; الحساب الى دعاه (da‘āhū) he called him to account; الحساب يوم yaum al- ḥ. the Day of Reckoning, Judgment Day; ل حسابا اقام to render account to s.o.; بال حساب without limit or bounds, to excess, to an unlimited extent; حساب غير من blindly, without forethought, at random; فالن لحساب to s.o.’s credit, to s.o.’s advantage; على
فالن حساب to s.o.’s debit, at s.o.’s expense, to s.o.’s disadvantage; الحساب سوء لقي laqiya sū’a 1-ḥ. he got a raw deal, he was in for it; جار حساب (jārin) current account; التوفير صندوق حسابات ḥ. ṣundūq at-taufīr savings-bank accounts; موقوف حساب blocked account; دوبية حسابات double-entry bookkeeping; الشرقي الحساب (šarqī) the Julian calendar; الغربي الحساب (garbī) the Gregorian calendar
حسابي ḥisābī arithmetical, mathematical, computational
محاسبة muḥāsaba pl. -āt accounting; clearing (com.); bookkeeping; request for accounting; examination of conscience (theol.) │المحاسبة قسم qism al-m. accounting department, comptroller’s office; clearing house
احتساب iḥtisāb computation; calculation, consideration, reflection; debiting; crediting; valuation; contentedness, satisfaction
حاسب ḥāsib counter, reckoner, arithmetician, calculator, computer
محسوب maḥsūb pl. -ūn, محاسب maḥāsib  protégé, pet, favorite; obedient, subservient (على to s.o.)
محسوبية maḥsūbīya esteem enjoyed by s.o., position of distinction; patronage, favored position, favoritism
محاسب muḥāsib, محاسبجي muḥāsibgī (eg.) accountant, bookkeeper; comptroller, auditor
محتسب muḥtasab that for which one can expect reward in the hereafter (e.g., suffering, loss, etc.)
حسد ḥasada u (ḥasad) to envy, grudge (ه s.o., على or ھ s.th.), be envious (ه of s.o., على or ھ because of s.th.) VI to envy each other
حسد ḥasad envy
 حسود pl. حسد ḥusud envious
تحاسد taḥāsud mutual envy
ḥasada حسدة ḥussād, حساد pl. حاسد
envious; envier, grudger
محسود maḥsūd envied; smitten by the evil eye
حسر ḥasara u i (ḥasr) to pull away or off, remove (ھ عن s.th., a cover, a veil, from); to uncover, lay bare, unveil (عن s.th.); -- (ḥusūr) to become dim (sight); -- ḥasira a ((ḥasar, حسرة ḥasra) to regret (على s.th.), be grieved, be pained (على by 176 s.th.); to sigh (على over s.th.); -- ḥasara i, ḥasira a (ḥasar) to become tired, fatigued II to fatigue, tire, weaken, sap (ه s.o.); to grieve, sadden (ه s.o.), cause pain or grief (ه to s.o.); to remove (ھ a cover, عن from), lay bare, unveil (عن s.th.) V to be distressed, be pained, be grieved (على by); to sigh (على over) VII to be pulled away or off, be removed (عن from); to be rolled up. be turned back (sleeve, عن from the arm); to disappear suddenly (عن from)
حسر ḥasar fatigue, debility, weakness
│البصر حسر ḥ. al-baṣar nearsightedness, myopia
حسر ḥasir grieved, sad; fatigued, languid, weary, tired
حسر ḥasra pl. ḥasarāt grief, sorrow, pain, distress, affliction; sigh │للحسرة يا yā la-l-ḥasrati alas! Unfortunately! حسرتي يا yā ḥasratī and حسرتاه وا wā ḥasratāh what a pity! too bad!
حسير ḥasīr pl. حسرى ḥasrā tired, weary, fatigued, exhausted; dim, dull (eye), nearsighted │البصر حسير ḥ. al-baṣar nearsighted, myopic
حسور ḥasūr nearsightedness, myopia
حسران ḥasrān regretful, sorry, sad, distressed, grieved
تحسر taḥassur sighing; regret
حاسر ḥāsir pl. حواسر ḥawāsir  bared, denuded │ البصر حاسر ḥ. al-baṣar nearsighted, myopic; الرأس حاسر ḥ. ar-ra’s bareheaded, hatless
حسك ḥasak (coll.; n. un. ة) thorns, spines; spikes, pricks; fish bones; awns, beard
(bot.); name of several prickly herbs, esp. of the genus Tribulus
حسكي ḥasakī thorny, prickly, spiny
حسم ḥasama i (ḥasm) to cut, sever, cut off (ھ s.th.); to finish, complete, terminate (ھ s.th.); to decide (ھ a question); to settle (ھ an argument); to deduct, discount (ھ an amount from a sum of money) VII to be severed, be cut off; to be finished, be completed, be terminated; to be settled (argument)
حسم ḥasm finishing, completion, termination; decision; settling, settlement (of an argument); discontinuance, shutdown, closing down; deduction, discounting (of an amount)
حسام ḥusām sword, sword edge
حسوم ḥasūm fatal, trying, grueling (pl.; days, nights, also years)
حاسم ḥāsim decisive; final, peremptory, conclusive, definite, definitive
حسن ḥasana u (ḥusn) to be handsome, beautiful, lovely, nice, fine, good; to be expedient, advisable, suitable, proper, fitting; to be in a proper state, be in a desirable condition │لديك حسن ان in ḥ. ladaika if you like it, if it seems all right to you; ان بك يحسن it is to your advantage that you ... ; you ought to …; ل استعداده حسن he was all willing to … II to beautify, embellish (ھ s.th.); to adorn, decorate (ھ s.th.); to improve, put into better form, ameliorate, better (ھ s.th.); to make a better presentation (ھ of s.th.); to present in a favorable light, depict as nice or desirable (ھ ل s.th. to s.o.; to sugar-coat, make more palatable (ھ s.th. unpleasant, s.th. disadvantageous) III to treat (ه s.o.) with kindliness IV to do right, act well; to do (ھ s.th), well, expertly, nicely; to know
 aḥsanta well done! bravo! االلمانية احسن (almānīya) to master the German language, know German well; التسديد احسن to aim well or accurately; مشورته احسن (mašūratahū) to give good advice; ب الظن احسن (ẓanna) to have a good opinion of ... , judge s.th. favorably; معاملته احسن (mu‘āmalatahū) to treat s.o. well V to become nicer, more handsome, more beautiful; to improve, ameliorate, get better X to deem (ھ s.th.) nice, etc., or good; to regard (ھ s.th.) as right, advisable or appropriate; to approve ( ھ of s.th.), sanction, condone (ھ s.th.); to come to like, to appreciate (ھ s.th.), find pleasure (ھ in s.th.); also = IV: استحسن االنجليزية (ingilīzīya) to know English well; pass. ustuḥsina to be good, commendable, advisable
حسن ḥusn beauty, handsomeness, prettiness, loveliness; excellence, superiority, perfection │الحظ لحسن fortunately; السلوك حسن good manners, good behavior; good conduct; والسلوك السير حسن (ḥ. as-sair) an irreproachable life; التصرف حسن ḥ. al-taṣarruf discretion, individual judgment; الظن حسن good opinion, favorable judgment; التعبير حسن euphemism; القصد حسن النية)) ḥ. al-qaṣd (an-nīya) good intention, good will, good faith; يوسف حسن ḥ. yūsuf beauty spot, patch; الحسن ست a kind of bindweed (Convolvulus cairicus L.; bot.); deadly nightshade, belladonna
حسن ḥasan pl. حسان ḥisān beautiful, handsome, lovely; pretty, nice; good, agreeable; excellent, superior, exquisite; حسنا ḥasanan well, splendidly, excellently, beautifully; الحسان the ladies; -- high sandhill
الحسنيون al-ḥasanīyūn the Hasanides, the descendants of ḥasan, son of ‘Alī and Fāṭima
احسن aḥsan  pl. احاسن aḥāsin  better; nicer, lovelier, more beautiful; more excellent, more splendid, more admirable│
(ھ how to do s.th.), be able (ھ to do s.th.); <<<< <<<< <<<< << he is better off than
to master (ھ s.th.), have command (ھ of s.th.), be proficient (ھ in s.th.; a language, an art, a handicraft, etc.), be conversant (ھ with s.th.); to do good, be charitable; to do favors, do good (الى or ب to s.o.), do (ب or ب s.o.) a good turn, be nice, friendly (الى or ب to s.o.); to give 177 alms, give charity (الى to s.o.) │احسنه ما mā aḥsanahū how good he is! how handsome he is! احسنت
 they a<re<; << << <<<<< (bi-llatī) in a friendly manner, amicably, with kindness
حسناء ḥasnā’  pl. حسان ḥisān (of a woman) beautiful, a beauty, a belle
الحسنى al-ḥusnā pl. -āt (f. of االحسن al- aḥsan) the best outcome, the happy ending; fair means, amicable manner │بالحسنى amicably, by fair means, in a friendly
manner; الحسنى االسماء (asmā’) the 99 attributes of God
حسنة ḥasana pl. -āt good deed, benefaction; charity, alms; pl. حسنات advantages, merits
حسون ḥassūn pl. حساسين ḥasāsīn  gold- finch
محسنة maḥsana s.th. nice, s.th. good; advantage; pl. محاسن maḥāsin  beauties, charms, attractions, merits, advantages, good qualities
تحسين taḥsīn beautification, embellishment; improvement, amelioration, betterment; processing, refining, finishing; (pl. تحاسين taḥāsīn) ornament, decoration
eugenics an-nasl t. تحسين النسل │O
محاسنة muḥāsana friendly treatment, kindliness amicability
احسان iḥsān beneficence. charity, almsgiving, performance of good deeds
تحسن taḥassun improvement, amelioration │التحسن في on the way to recovery
استحسان istiḥsān approval, consent; acclaim; discretion; application of discretion in a legal decision (Isl. Law)
محسن muḥassin embellisher, beautifier, improver; pl. محسنات muḥassināt cosmetics
محسن muḥsin beneficent, charitable
مستحسن mustaḥsan approved, commendable; pleasant, agreeable 178
(حسا (حسو ḥasā u (ḥasw), V and VIII to drink, sip (ھ s.th.)
حسو ḥasw and حساء ḥasā’ soup, broth
حسوة ḥaswa pl. ḥasawāt a sip
حسوة ḥuswa pl. ḥusuwāt, ḥusawāt, احسية aḥasiya a sip, small quantity of liquid; soup, broth; bouillon
حش ḥašša u (ḥašš) to mow, cut (ھ s.th.) II to smoke hashish
حشيش ḥašīš (coll.) pl. حشائشhāšā’iš  herbs, grasses; weeds; hay; hemp (Cannabis sativa L.; bot.), hashish, Cannabis; stillborn child │ الدينار حشيش ḥ. ad-dīnār hops
حشيشة ḥašīša (n. un.) herb
حشاش ḥaššāš pl. -ūn smoker or chewer of hashish. hashish addict
 حشاش ḥuššāš, حشاشة ḥušāša last breath, last spark of life
حشيشي ḥašīšī (eg.) sap-green, reseda- colored
محاش pl. miḥašša محشة miḥašš, محش
maḥāšš  sickle, scythe; fire iron, poker
محشة miḥašša pl. -āt (eg.) tool for weeding, weeder
hashish ḳāna m. محشش خانة maḥšaš, محشش den
محششة pl. محاشش maḳāšiš  hashish den
حشد ḥašada i u (ḥašd) to gather, concentrate, mass (ه esp. troops), call up, mobilize (ه an army); to pile up, store up, accumulate (ھ s.th., الى at a place) II to amass, accumulate ( ھ s.th.), mass, concentrate (ه esp. troops) V and VIII to rally, come together, assemble, gather, crowd together, throng together; to be concentrated, be massed (troops); to fall into line (troops)
حشد ḥašd pl. حشود ḥušūd assembling, rallying; gathering, assembly, crowd, throng; concentration, massing (esp. of troops); mobilization. calling up (of an army)
حشد taḥaššud pl. -āt concentration (of troops)
احتشاد iḥtišād pl. -āt gathering, crowd; concentration (of troops)
حشيد numerous (of an assembly), crowded (of a public demonstration)
O حاشدة ḥāšida battery (el.)
حشر ḥašara i u (ḥašr) to gather, assemble, rally ( ه people); to cram, crowd, pack, jam (together); to squeeze. press, force, stuff, tuck (بين or ھ في s.th. into)
الحشر يوم yaum al-ḥašr the day of congregation (of the dead), the Day of resurrection
حشرة ḥašara pl. -āt insect; pl. vermin, insect pests │ الحشرات علم ‘ilm al-ḥ. entomology
حشري ḥašarī insectile, insectival, insect- (in compounds); entomologic(al)
حشرج ḥašraja and II taḥašraja to rattle in the throat
حشرجة ḥašraja rattling, rattle in the throat
حشف V to be dressed shabbily, dress slovenly
حشف ḥašaf dates of inferior quality
حشفة ḥašafa glans (penis; anat.)
حشك ḥašaka i (ḥašk) to cram, jam, squeeze, stuff (ھ في s.th. into)
حشم ḥašama i (ḥašm) to shame, put to shame (ه s.o.) 11 and IV do. V and VIII to be ashamed to face s.o. (من or عن); to be reticent, modest, shy, bashful, diffident
حشم ḥašam servants, retinue, entourage, suite
حشمة ḥišma shame, bashfulness, timidity, diffidence; modesty; decency, decorum 179
حشيم ḥašīm pl. حشماء ḥušamā’  modest, timid, bashful, shy, diffident
محاشم maḥāšim  pubes, genitals
تحشم taḥaššum and احتشام iḥtišām shame, shyness, modesty, reticent, decency, decorum
محتشم muḥtašim shy, bashful; modest, reticent, decent, decorous
حشو) حشا) ḥaša u (ḥašw) to stuff, fill, dress (ھ ب s.th. with; esp. fowl, etc.); to fill in (ھ s.th.); to load (ھ a firearm; ھ ھ s.th. with, e.g., a camera); to fill (ھ a tooth); to insert (ھ s.th.) 11 to interpalate (ھ s.th.); to insert (ھ s.th.); to provide (ھ s.th.) with a margin; to hem ( ھ a dress); to supply (ھ a book) with marginal notes or glosses III to except, exclude (ه من s.o. from) V to keep away, stand aloof, abstain (ه من from), avoid, shun (من s.th.), beware (من of), be on one’s guard (من against) VI to keep away, abstain (عن or من from), beware (ھ or عن or من of), avoid, shun (ھ or عن or من s.th.)
حشو ḥašw that with which s.th. is stuffed or filled; dressing, stuffing (of fowl, .to.); filling (of tooth); insertion; (gram.) parenthesis; interpolation
حشو ḥašwa pl. -āt filling, stuffing (cushion, cookery, etc.); load (of a cartridge), charge (of a min.); panel, inlay, inserted piece (in paneling, in a door)
حشا ḥašan pl. احشاء aḥšā’ bowels, intestines; interior, inside │احشاء في in the interior of, within, in
حشى ḥašan = حشا ḥašan
حشية ḥašīya pl. –āt, حشايا ḥašāyā cushion, pillow; mattress
 except, )ل or acc. genit., (with ḥāšā حاشا حاشا لك ان forbid! God حاشى <I، حاشا │<I save حاش <I، حاش لك ...; you that you from it be far حاشا <I، حاشا لك ٠٨١ = (ḥāša)
تحشية taḥšya insertion; interpolation
تحاش taḥāšin avoidance
حاشية ḥāšiya pl. حواش ḥawāšin border; seam, hem; edge; margin (of a book); marginal gives; marginal notes; commentary on certain words and passages of a book, supercommentary; footnote; postscript; retinue, entourage, suite, servants; dependents; pl. حواش critical apparatus │ الحاشية رقيق and الحواشي رقيق nice, polite, courteous, gracious, amiable, kindly, friendly; الحھشية رقة riqqat al-ḥāš. niceness, amiability, graciousness
محشو maḥšūw filled, dressed; stuffed; loaded (firearm); pl. محشوات maḥšūwāt filled, or stuffed, dishes
محشي maḥšīy filled, stuffed (esp. food); s.th. filled or stuffed
حص ḥaṣṣa u to fall as a share (ه to s.o.) III to share (ھ ه s.th. with s.o.) IV to allot s.o. (ه) his share
حص ḥuṣṣ saffron
حصة ḥiṣṣa pl. حصص ḥiṣaṣ share, portion, allotment; share (fin.); contingent, quota; span of time; lesson, class period │ في حصة الربحḥ. fī r-rabḥ dividend (fin.); O حصة التأسيس founders’ share; O الحصص نظام quota system, apportionment; وجيزة حصة في in a short time
تحصيص taḥṣīṣ quota system, apportionment
محاصة muḥāṣṣa allotment; sharing (with s.o.), partaking, participation
حصى see حصالبان
حصب ḥaṣaba i u to cover or strew with pebbles or gravel (ھ ground); to macadamize (ھ ground), metal (ھ a road); -- ḥaṣiba a and pass. ḥuṣiba to have the measle II to cover or strew with pebbles or gravel (ھ ground); to macadamize (ھ ground), metal (ھ a road) 180
حصب ḥaṣab road metal, crushed rock, ballast
حصب ḥaṣbā’  (coll.) pebbles; gravel
حصب ḥaṣba measles (med.)
حاصبة ḥāṣiba storm, hurricane
حصحص ḥaṣḥaṣa to be or become clear, plain, manifest; to come to light (truth)
حصد ḥaṣada i u (ḥaṣd, حصاد ḥaṣad, ḥiṣad) to harvest, reap (ھ s.th.); to mow (ھ s.th.) IV,
VIII and X to be ripe
حصد ḥaṣd and حصاد ḥiṣād harvesting, reaping, harvest; حصاد harvest time
حصيد ḥaṣid, حصيدة ḥaṣīda pl. حصائد ḥaṣā’id  crop, harvest yield │ وحصيد قائم everything without exception
حصاد ḥaṣṣād reaper; harvester
محصد miḥṣad pl. محاصد maḥāṣid  sickle O حصادة ḥaṣṣāda and O محصدة miḥṣada
mowing machine, mower │ O دراسة حصادة
(darrāsa) combine
حاصد ḥāṣid reaper
O حاصدة ḥāṣid mowing machine, mower محصود maḥṣūd harvested, reaped, mown محصد muḥṣid and mustaḥṣid ripe
حصر ḥaṣara i u (ḥaṣr) to surround, encircle, encompass, ring (ھ s.th.); to enclose (ھ s.th.); to parenthesize (ھ a word); to blockade (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to besiege, beleaguer (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to detain, deter, restrain, contain, hold back (ه s.o.); to limit, restrict (ھ في or ب s.th. to); to condense, reduce in scope (ھ s.th.); to narrow down, confine (ھ في s.th. to, also a suspicion to s.o.); to bring together, compile, arrange (في ھ s.th. under a rubric); to enter (ھ في s.th. in a list); to put together, set up, list, enumerate (ھ s.th.); to comprise, contain, include, involve (ھ s.th.); -- ḥaṣira a (ḥaṣar) to be in a fix, be in a dilemma III to encircle, surround (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to shut off, seclude (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to block (ھ s.th.); to beleaguer, besiege (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to blockade (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to detain, deter, restrain (ه s.o.) VII to be straitened, confined, narrowed in; to be or become restricted, limited (ب or في to); to limit o.s. ( ب or في to); to be condensed (في to), be concentrated (في in); to be or become united (e.g., حكمه تحت under s.o.’s rule); to be reducible (في to), be expressible (في in terms of), consist (في in)
حصر ḥaṣr encirclement, encompassment, enclosure, corralling; parenthesizing; blocking, blockading, beleaguering, siege;
 detention, determent; restraint, retention, containment, check; limitation, restriction, confinement ~ narrowing; gathering, collecting (of s.th. scattered), compilation; enumeration, listing, counting, computing; centralization, concentration; (tobacco) monopoly │ بالحصر strictly speaking; على الحصرحصر سبيل exhaustively; التموين حصر ḥ. al-tamwīn rationing; الحصر عالمة ‘alāmat al- ḥ. parentheses, brackets (typ.); تحت يدخل ال الحصر (yadḳulu) or له حصر ال (ḥaṣra) boundless, infinite, immeasurable, innumerable; الحصر يفوق yafūqu al-ḥaṣra do.; O الحصر اجازة ijāzat al-ḥ. patent on an invention; والتنباك التبغ حصر ادارة idārat ḥ. at- tibg wa-t-tumbāk Government Tobacco Monopoly (Syr.)
حصر ḥuṣr retention (of urine); constipation
حصر ḥaṣar dyslogia, inability to express
o.s. effectively
حصير ḥaṣīr pl. حصر ḥuṣur mat
mat ḥaṣā’ir  حصائر pl. ḥaṣīra حصيرة
حصار ḥiṣār block, blockage, barrier; blockade; siege 181
محاصرة muḥāṣara block, blockage, barrier; blockade; siege
انحصار inḥiṣār restrictedness, limitation, confinement; (tobacco) monopoly
محصور maḥṣūr blocked, blockaded; beleaguered, besieged; limited, restricted, confined (في to); narrow
حصرم ḥiṣrim (coll.; n. un. ة) unripe and sour grapes (syr.)
حصف ḥaṣufa u (حصف ḥaṣāfa) to have sound judgment, be judicious, discriminating
حصف ḥaṣif endowed with sound judgment, judicious, discriminating
حصيف ḥaṣīf endowed with sound judgment, judicious, discriminating
حصافة ḥaṣāfa sound judgment, judiciousness
حصل ḥaṣala u (حصول ḥuṣūl) to set in; to be there, be existent, extant; to arise, come about; to result, come out; to happen, occur, transpire, come to pass, take place; to happen, occur (ل to s.o.), come (ل upon s.o.), befall, overtake (ل s.o.); to originate, emanate, derive, stem (من from), be caused,
be produced (من by); to attain, obtain, get, receive, achieve (على s.th.), win (على s.o. or s.th.); to come into possession (على of s.th.); to seek (على a permit), apply (على for a permit); to collect, recover (على a debt), call in (على funds); to receive. take in (على s.th.) II to cause s.th. (ھ) to happen or set in; to attain. obtain (ھ s.th.); to acquire (ھ s.th., also knowledge); to infer, deduce (ھ s.th.); to collect (ھ a fee, fare, etc.), levy (ھ taxes, fees, etc.), call in (ھ money); to summarize, sum up (ھ s.th.) V to result (من from), come out (sum); to be obtained, be attained; to be raised, be levied, be required. be demanded; to be taken in, come in (fees, taxes, funds); to be collected (taxes); to procure for o.s., get (على s.th.); to attain, receive, obtain (على s.th.); to acquire (على s.th.); to collect (على fees) X to procure for o.s., get (على s.th.); to attain. Receive, obtain (على s.th.); to acquire (على s.th.)
حصول ḥuṣūl setting in, occurrence, incidence. happening (of an event or process); obtainment. attainment (على of s.th.); achievement (على of s.th.); acquisition (على of s.th.)
حصيلة ḥaṣīla pl. حصائل ḥaṣā’il  rest, remainder; amount collected, proceeds, returns; revenue, receipts, yield, income, takings
up look حويصلة and حوصل، حوصلة alphabetically
حصالة ḥaṣāla collection box, alms box
محصل maḥṣal result, outcome, upshot, issue
تحصيل taḥṣīl pl. -āt attainment, obtainment, gain; acquisition (also of knowledge); learning, studying, scientific studies; collection, raising, levy(ing), calling in (of funds, taxes); income, revenue, receipts, returns, proceeds; résumé, summary, gist (of a speech or opinion); من يقال ان الحاصل تحصيل in summary, it may be said ...
muḥaṣṣil محصل = (eg.) taḥṣīlgī تحصيلجي
حاصل ḥāṣil pl. حواصل□ ḥawāsil  setting in, occurring, taking place, happening; result, outcome, sum, total, product (also math.); revenues, receipts, proceeds, gain; income, returns; crop, harvest; warehouse, storehouse, granary, depot, magazine; main content, purport, gist, essence, substance (of
 a speech); الحاصل briefly, in short; pl. حاصالت product(s), yield. produce. production (econ.)
محصول maḥsūl pl. -āt, محاصل maḥāṣīl  result, outcome, issue; yield, gain; product, produce; crop, harvest; production 182
محصل muḥaṣṣil collector; tax collector; cashier; (bus, streetcar) conductor
متحصل mutaḥaṣṣil yield, revenue, proceeds, receipts, returns (من from)
حصن ḥaṣuna u (حصانة ḥaṣāna) to be inaccessible, be well fortified; to be chaste (woman) II to make inaccessible (ھ s.th.); to strengthen (ھ s.th.); to fortify, entrench (ھ s.th.); to immunize, make proof (ضد ḍidda against) IV to make inaccessible (ھ s.th.); to fortify, entrench (ھ s.th.); to be chaste, pure (woman); to remain chaste, be of unblemished reputation (woman) V to strengthen one’s position, protect o.s.; to be fortified; to be secure, be protected
حصن ḥiṣn pl. حصون ḥuṣūn fortress, fort, castle, citadel, stronghold; fortification, entrenchment; protection │ طائر حصن Flying Fortress
حصان ḥiṣān pl. حصن ḥuṣun, احصنة aḥsina horse; stallion │ البحر حصان ḥ. al- baḥr hippopotamus; بخاري حصان (buḳārī) iron horse; حصن قوة qūwat ḥ., or حصان alone, horse power
حصين ḥaṣīn inaccessible, strong, fortified, firm, secure(d), protected; immune, proof, invulnerable (ضد ḍidda against) │ الحصين الحصن (ḥiṣn) stronghold (fig.; e.g., of radicalism)
fox l-ḥuṣain abū ابو الحصين
حصانة ḥaṣāna strength, ruggedness, forbiddingness, impregnability, inaccessibility; shelteredness, chastity (of a woman); invulnerability, inviolability; immunity (of deputies, diplomats; against illness)
تحصين taḥṣīn pl. -āt fortification, entrenchment; strengthening, cementing, solidification; immunization
احصان iḥṣān blamelessness, unblemished reputation, integrity (Isl. Law)
تحصن taḥaṣṣun securing, safeguarding, protection, protectedness
محصن muḥaṣṣan fortified; entrenched; immune, proof (ضد ḍidda against)
محصنة muḥṣina, muḥṣana sheltered, well-protected, chaste; of unblemished reputation (woman; Isl. Law)
حصى IV to oount, enumerate (ھ s.th.); to calculate, compute (ھ s.th. من from); to debit, charge (ھ على s.th. to s.o.’s account), hold (ھ s.th. على against s.o.) │ال يحصى (yuḥṣā) innumerable

حصى ḥaṣan (coll.) pebbles, little stones
حصاة ḥaṣāh, حصوة ḥaṣwa pl. حصيات ḥaṣayāt little stone; pebble; calculus, stone (med.) │ بولية حصاة (baulīya) cystic calculus; صفراوية حصاة (ṣafrāwīya) gallstone, biliary calculus
rosemary حصالبان lubān, ḥaṣā حصى لبان
(bot.)
حصوي ḥaṣawī stony, pebbly, gravelly
احصاء iḥṣā’ pl. -āt count, counting; enumeration; calculation, computation; statistics │ السكان احصاء i. as-sukkān census
احصائي iḥṣā’ī statistic(al); (pl. -ūn) statistician
احصائية iḥṣā’īya pl. -āt statistics
حض ḥaḍḍa u (ḥaḍḍ) and II to spur on, incite (ه s.o., على to), goad, prod (ه s.o.• على to do s.th.)
حض ḥaḍḍ incitement, inducement, prodding, prompting, instigation
حضيض ḥaḍīḍ, pl. حضض ḥuḍuḍ, احضة aḥiḍḍa foot of a mountain; lowland; perigee (astron.); depth; state of decay │ الحضيض الى نزل to sink low (fig.); الى دكه الحضيض (dakkahū) to ruin s.th. completely, run s.th. into the ground
حضر ḥaḍara u (حضور ḥuḍūr) to be present (ھ at), be in the presence (ه of s.o.); to 183 attend (ھ s.th.); to be present (ھ in s.o.’s mind), be readily recalled (ه by s.o.); to take part, participate (مجلسا majlisan in a meeting); to come, get (الى or ه ھ، to s.o., to a place), arrive (الى or ھ at a place); to
 visit (ھ a place), attend (ھ a public event), go (ھ to a performance, etc.); to appear ( امام before a judge, etc., الى in, at), show up (الى in, at); to betake o.s., go (من الى
from ... to); (حضارة ḥaḍāra) to be settled, sedentary (in a civilized region, as opposed to nomadic existence)

II to ready, make ready, prepare (ھ s.th., also, e.g., as medicine = to compound), make, produce, manufacture (ھ s.th.); to study, prepare (ھ a lesson); to fetch, get, bring (ه s.o., ھ s.th.), procure, supply (ھ s.th.); to settle (ه s.o), make s.o. (ه) sedentary; to civilize (ه s.o., ھ s.th.) III to give a lecture, present s.th. in a lecture (ه to s.o.); to lecture, give a course of lectures IV to fetch, get, bring (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), procure, supply (ھ s.th.); to take (ه s.o., ھ s.th., الى to a place) │معه احضره to have s.th. with one, bring s.th. along V to prepare o.s., ready o.s., get ready (ل for); to be ready, prepared; to become settled, be sedentary in a civilized region; to be civilized, be in a state of civilization; to become urbanized, become a town dweller VIII to come (ه to s.o.), be in the presence (ه of s.o.); to live in a civilized region; pass. ustuḥḍira to die X to have s.th. (ھ) brought, to call, send (ه ھ، for s.o., for s.th.), have s.o. (ه) come; to summon (ه s.o.); to fetch, procure, supply, get, bring ( ھ s.th.); to conjure, call up, evoke (ھ a spirit); to visualize, envision, call to mind (ھ s.th.); to carry with o.s., bring along (ھ s.th.); to prepare (ه ھ، e.g., a medicinal preparation)
حضر ḥaḍar a civilized region with towns and villages and a settled population (as opposed to desert, steppe); settled population, town dwellers (as opposed to nomads)
حضري ḥaḍarī settled, sedentary, resident, not nomadic, non-Bedouin, like urbanites; civilized; urban; town dweller
حضرة ḥaḍra presence │حضرة في in the presence of ...; العالية الحضرة (‘āliya) His Highness (formerly, title of the Bey of Tunis); حضرتكم a respectful form of address, esp. in letters; الدكتور حضرة  cf. Fr. Monsieur le docteur
حضور ḥuḍūr presence; visit, participation, attendance; (as one pl. of حاضر) those present │بحضوره in his presence; الحفلة حضور ḥ. al-ḥafla attendance of the celebrationالذھن حضور ḥ. ad-dihn presence of mind; حضور ورقة waraqat ḥ. summons (jur.)
حضوري ḥuḍūrī: حضورية احكام (aḥkām) judgments delivered in the presence of the litigant parties after oral proceedings (jur.); حضوريا ḥuḍūrīyan contradictorily (jur.)
حضارة ḥaḍāra civilization; culture; settledness, sedentariness
حضيرة ḥaḍīra pl. حضائر ḥaḍā’ir  a small group of 6 to 12 people (specif., the smallest unit of boy scouts = patrol); section, squad (mil.; Syr.)
محضر maḥḍar presence; attendance, coming, appearance (of s.o.); assembly, meeting, gathering, convention; (pl. محاضر maḥāḍir ) minutes, official report,
process-verbal, record of the factual findings │الجرد محضر m. al-jard inventory list; منه بمحضر bi-maḥḍarin minhu in s.o.’s presence
تحضير taḥḍīr preparing, readying, making ready; (pl. -āt) preparation (ل for; also e.g., for an examination); making, preparation, cooking (of food, etc.), production, manufacture
تحضيري taḥdīrī preparatory, preparative
│للمعلمين التحضيرية المدارس  (mu‘allimīn) 184 preparatory institutes for teachers, teachers’ colleges (Eg.)
محاضرة muḥāḍara pl. -āt lecture
احضار iḥḍār procurement, supply, fetching, bringing
تحضر taḥaḍḍur civilized way of life
احتضار iḥtiḍār demise, death
استحضار istiḥḍār making, production, manufacture; preparation; summoning │ االرواح استحضار istiḥḍār al-arwāḥ evocation of spirits, spiritism
حاضر ḥāḍir pl. حضر ḥuḍḍar, حضور ḥuḍūr present; attending; الحاضر the present (time); prepared (ل for); ready; (pl. حضار ḥuḍḍār, حضرة ḥaḍara) settled,
 sedentary, resident, village or town dweller, not nomadic │ الحاضر في or في الحاضر الوقت at present, now; الفكر حاضر ḥ. al-fikr quick-witted, quick at repartee; نقد حاضر (naqd) cash, ready money
حاضرة ḥāḍira pl. حواضر ḥawāḍir  capital city, metropolis; city (as a center of civilization)
محضور maḥḍūr possessed, haunted or inhabited by a jinni; demoniac
محضر muḥaḍḍir maker, producer, manufacturer; dissector (med.)
محاضر muḥāḍir lecturer, speaker
محضر muḥḍir court usher
متحضر mutaḥaḍḍir civilized
محتضر muḥtaḍar dying, in the throes of death, on the brink of death; a dying person; haunted or inhatbited by a jinni; demoniac
مستحضر mustaḥḍar pl. -āt preparation (chem., pharm.) │ دوائي مستحضر (dawā’ī) medicinal preparation
حضرموت ḥaḍramaut  Hadhramaut
حضرمي ḥaḍramī pl. حضارم ḥaḍārim  man from Hadhramaut; Hadhramautian (adj.)
حضن ḥaḍana u (ḥaḍn, حضانة ḥiḍāna) to clasp in one’s arms, embrace, hug (ه s.o.);
to nurse, bring up, raise (ه a child); (ḥaḍn, حضان ḥidān, حضانة ḥiḍāna, حضون ḥuḍūn) to hatch, brood, incubate (ھ an egg; of a bird) VI to embrace one another, cling to one another, nestle against each other VII to clasp in one’s arms, embrace, hug (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to harbor in one,s bosom (ھ feeling); to hatch, concoct, contrive (ھ s.th.); to bring up, raise (ھ a child)
حضن ḥaḍn pl. احضان aḥḍān breast, bosom (between the outstretched arms); armful, that which can be carried in one's arms │ بالحضن قبله (qabilahū) he received him with open arms; احضان بين and في احضان amid, among; with, in the presence of (s.o.); الصحراء احضان في (saḥrā’) in the heart (or folds) of the desert; بين اخذتني احضانھا she took me in her arms
حضانة ḥiḍāna, ḥaḍāna raising, bringing up, nursing (of a child); hatching (of an egg), incubation │ الحضانة دارchildren’s home, day nursery, crèche
حضين in embraced, bugged, resting in s.o.’s arms
maḥādin  محاضن pl. maḥḍan محضن
children’s home, day nursery, crèche
احتضان iḥtiḍān embrace, hug(ging), accolade
ḥawāḍin  حواضن pl. ḥāḍina حاضنة
nurse-maid, dry nurse
محتضن muḥtaḍin embracing, hugging; tender, affectionate
حط ḥaṭṭa u (ḥaṭṭ) to put, place, put down, set down (ھ s.th.); to take down (ھ a load, burden); to lower, decrease, diminish, reduce (ھ or من s.th.); to depreciate (من قدره min qadrihī or قيمته من min qudratihī the value of s.th.) │الرحال حط (riḥāla) to halt, make a stop, dismount, encamp (while traveling on horseback, 185 camelback. etc.); -- u (ḥaṭṭ, حطوط ḥuṭūṭ) to sink, descend, go down; to alight (bird); to land (airplane); to drop (price) II to put down, set down, take off, unload (ھ a load) VII to sink, descend, go down; to decrease, diminish; to decline, decay, wane VIII to put down, set down, take down (ھ s.th.)
حط ḥaṭṭ (act of) putting or setting down; depreciation, belittling, derogation, disparagement (من of s.th.); reduction, diminution, decrease (من of s.th.)
حطة ḥiṭṭa alleviation, relief, mitigation; abasement, debasement, demotion, degradation (in rank, dignity, prestige); humiliation, insult, indignity
احط aḥaṭṭ lower
حطيطة ḥaṭīṭa price reduction
محط maḥaṭṭ place at which s.th. is put down or deposited; stopping place, stop; pause fermata, hold, concluding strain, cadence (mus.) │اآلمال محط object of hope, that on which one's hopes are pinned; كان األنظار محط to attract the glances, draw attention to o.s.; الكالم محط m. al-kalām sense, or meaning, of one’s words
 محطة maḥaṭṭa pl. -āt stopping place, stop (also of public conveyances); station, post; railroad station; broadcasting station, radio station │ التيار تحويل محطة m. taḥwīl at-tayyār transformer station; االذاعة محطة الالسلكية)) m. al-idā‘a (al-lāsi1kīya) broadcasting station, radio station; transmitter (station); رئيسية محطة (ra’īsīya) (railroad) main station; O االشارات محطة m. al-išārāt signal post; O االرسال محطة m. al- irsāl transmitter (station; radio); محطة الجوية لالرصاد (li-l-arṣād al-jawwīya) meteorological station, weather station; الصرف محطة m. aṣ-ṣarf (Eg.) pump station (for drainage); power plant; O محطة االستقبال receiving station (radio); O محطة األمواج قصيرة السلكية (lā-silkīya qaṣīrat al- amwāj) short-wave transmitter station; الكھرباء توليد محطة m. taulīd al-kahrabā’ and كھربائية محطة power plant
انحطاط inḥiṭāṭ decline, fall, decay, decadence; inferiority │االنحطاط احساس iḥsās al-inḥ. sense of inferiority
انحطاطي inḥiṭāṭ postclassical writer
منحط munḥaṭṭ low, base, low-level, low- grade; fallen, degraded (woman); mean, vile, vulgar; inferior
حطب ḥaṭaba i to gather firewood │ في حطب حبله(fī ḥablihī) to support s.o., stand by s.o., back s.o. up VIII to gather firewood
حطب ḥaṭab pl. احطاب aḥṭāb firewood
حطاب ḥaṭṭāb wood gatherer; wood- cutter, lumberjack; vendor of firewood
تحطيب taḥṭīb singlestick fencing (a popular game, esp. in rural areas; eg.)
حاطب taḥṭīb wood gatherer; woodcutter, lumberjack; vendor of firewood │ كحاطب ليل ka-ḥāṭibi lailin lit.: like one who gathers wood at night, i.e., blindly, at random, heedlessly (said of s.o. who does not realize, or think about, what he is doing)
حطم ḥaṭama i (ḥaṭm) to break, shatter, smash, wreck, demolish (ھ s.th.) II = I; V to break. go to pieces; to be broken, b. smashed, be shattered; to crash (e.g., airplane, structure, etc.); to be wrecked (ship) VII = V
حطمة ḥiṭma pl. حطم ḥiṭam particle, small piece, shred, bit, morsel; s.th. broken
حطام ḥuṭām debris, rubble; fragments, shards, broken pieces; wreckage, wreck (of a ship) │الدنيا حطام ad-dunyā the ephemeral things of this world, the vanities of the world
حطيم ḥaṭīm smashed, shattered, wrecked 186
تحطيم taḥṭīm smashing, shattering, wrecking, breaking, demolition, destruction, disruption │O الجليد تحطيم سفينة icebreaker
تحطم taḥaṭṭum crumbling, disintegration; crash (of an airplane); collapse, breakdown
icebreaker حاطمة الجليد O ḥāṭima: حاطمة (naut.)
محطم muḥaṭṭim crashing, thundering, roaring (of an explosion. etc.) – muḥaṭṭam broken (language)
محطمة muḥaṭṭima: ثلجية محطمة (taljīya) icebreaker (naut.)
حظ ḥaẓẓa a (ḥaẓẓ) to be lucky, Fortunate IV=I
حظ ḥaẓẓ pl. حظوظ ḥuẓūẓ part, portion, share, allotment; lot, fate, destiny; good luck, good fortune; affluence, wealth, fortune; prosperity; pleasure │ من حظ ذو endowed with; الحظ لحسن li-ḥusni l-ḥ. and الحظ حسن من fortunately, luckily; الحظ سوء sū’ al-ḥ. bad luck, misfortune; الحظ سيء sayyi’ al-ḥ. unlucky, unfortunate;  لسوء الحظ unfortunately; حظي حسن من luckily for me, fortunately; ان حظه حسن من كان he was lucky in that he ...; حظا منھا احسن ليس he is no better off than she is
حظيظ ḥaẓīẓ lucky, fortunate
محظوظ lucky, fortunate; content(ed), happy, glad
حظر ḥaẓara u (ḥaẓr) to fence in, hedge in (ھ s.th.); to forbid (على ھ to s.o. s.th.), prohibit (على ھ s.o. from doing s.th.)
حظر ḥaẓr forbiddance, interdiction, prohibition, ban; embargo
حظار ḥiẓār, ḥaẓār wall, partition, screen; fence, palisade, railing
 حظيرة ḥaẓīra pl. حظائر ḥaẓā’ir  enclosure, railing, fence, palisade, hedge; compound, yard, pound, pinfold; corral, pen, paddock, coop; hangar, shed; field, domain, realm (fig.) │حظيرة في (with foll. genit.) inside of, within; حظيرته الى جذبه (jadabahū) to bring s.o. under one’s influence; الطائرات حظائر aircraft hangars; القدس حظيرة ḥ. al-quds Paradise
محظور maḥẓūr interdicted, prohibited, forbidden (على to s.o.); embargoed; pl. محظورات forbidden things, restrictions
(حظو and حظي (حظي ḥaẓiya a (حظوة ḥuẓwa, ḥiẓwa) to enjoy the favor or good graces of s.o. (عند), be in s.o.’s (عند) favor or good graces; to acquire, obtain, attain, gain, win (ب s.th.)
حظوة ḥuẓwa, ḥiẓwa favored position, role of favorite; precedence; favor, grace; good will, benevolence; prestige, credit, standing, respect, esteem │ عند حظوة نال لدى)) to find favor with s.o.
حظية ḥaẓīya pl. حظايا ḥaẓāyā paramour, mistress, concubine
محظية maḥẓīya pl. -āt paramour. mistress, concubine
حف ḥaffa u (ḥaff) to surround (ه ھ، ب s.o., s.th. with, also ب and حول s.o., s.th.), enclose, encompass, border (ھ ب، s.th.); to depilate (ھ a part of the body), unhair (ھ the skin); to trim, clip (ھ the beard); to chafe, rub off, abrade (ھ s.th.) │ العين به تحفhe is the object of admiring glances, he is the center of attention, all eyes are upon him;
-- i (حفيف ḥafīf) to rustle II and VIII to surround, (ه ھ، ب، حول، s.o., s.th.), enclose, encompass, border (ھ حول،ب، s.th.)
حفاف ḥifāf side
حفيف ḥafīf rustle, rustling
محفة miḥaffa (also maḥaffa) pl. -āt litter, stretcher; roller stretcher; sedan
حاف ḥaff: حاف خبز (ḳubz) plain bread (without anything to go with it; eg.)187
حافة ḥāffa pl. -āt enclosure, edge, margin; brim of a vessel; border, brink, verge; fringe, hem │ الخراب حافة على’alā ḥ. al-ḳarāb on the brink of ruin
حفيد ḥafīd pl. احفاد aḥfād, حفدة ḥafada grandson; descendant, offspring, scion
حفيدة ḥafīda granddaughter
حفر ḥafara i (ḥafr) to dig (ھ s.th.): to drill (for oil): to excavate (archeol.): to carve (ھ s.th.): to engrave, etch (ھ metal) │ حفر خنادقto dig trenches; حفرة حفر (ḥufratan) to prepare a pitfall, prepare an ambush VII pass. of I; VIII to dig
حفر ḥafr digging, earthwork, excavation (also archeol.); unearthing; drilling (for oil): carving, inscribing (e.g., of letters); engraving, etching; graphic arts (etching, wood engraving); scurvy (syr.) │ جھاز الحفر jahāz al-ḥ. oil rig; oil derrick
حفرة ḥufra pl. حفر ḥufar pit; hollow, cavity, excavation; hole
حفرية ḥafrīya digging, excavation; O gravure; pl. حفريات excavations (archeol.)
حفار ḥaffār digger; engraver; driller; stone mason │ القبور حفار gravedigger
حفير ḥafīr dug, dug out, excavated, unearthed
حفيرة ḥafīra pl. حفائر ḥafā’ir  s.th. excavated or unearthed; pl. excavations (archeol.)
احفور uḥfūr pl. احافير aḥāfīr  s.th. excavated; fossil; pl. excavations (archeol.)
محفر miḥfar pl. محافر maḥāfir  spade
حافر ḥāfir pl. حوافر ḥawāfir  hoof │وقع الحافر على الحافر to coincide, happen to correspond exactly; الحافر على on the spot, right away, at once
حافري ḥāfirī ungular, ungulate
حافرة ḥāfira original condition, beginning │الحافرة عند on the spot, right away, at once; حافرته الى رجع to revert to its original state or origin
محفور maḥfūr dug; inscribed, engraved; carved
حفز ḥafaza i (ḥafz) to pierce, stab (ه s.o., ب with the spear); to incite, instigate, urge, prompt, induce (على or ه الى s.o. to s.th.) V to prepare o.s. get ready, be ready, be about to do s.th. (ل or الى). set out to do s.th. (ل or الى); to get ready to jump, make
 a running start; to listen, pay attention VIII to be about to do s.th., be ready (ل for)
تحفز taḥaffuz preparedness, readiness; vim, dash, verve, sweep, élan
حافز ḥāfiz pl. حوافز ḥawāfiz  spur, drive ( على to do s.th.), incentive (على to), initiative
مستحفز mutaḥfiz ready, prepared (ل for)
حفظ ḥafiẓa a (ḥifẓ) to preserve (ھ s.th.); to protect, guard, defend (ه s.o.): to observe, bear in mind (ھ s.th.), comply (ھ with s.th.), be mindful, be heedful (ھ of s.th.); to keep up, maintain, sustain, retain, uphold (ھ s.th.); to hold, have in safekeeping (ھ s.th.), take care (ھ of s.th.); to keep, put away, save, store (ھ s.th); to conserve, preserve (ھ s.th.); to retain in one’s memory, remember, know by heart (ھ s.th.); to memorize, learn by heart, commit to memory (ھ s.th., esp. the Koran); to reserve (لنفسه ھ for o.s. s.th.): to stay, discontinue, suspend (التحقيق a judicial investigation; jur.) │ﷲ حفظه may God protect him! بالبريد حفظ to hold in care of general delivery (ھ s.th.); في يحفظ البوسطة (yuḥfaẓu) in care of general delivery, poste restante; ل الوفاء حفظ (wafā’a) to be loyal to s.o., keep faith with
s.o. II to have s.o. (ه) memorize (ھ s.th.) III to preserve, keep up, maintain, uphold, sustain (على s.th.); 188 to supervise, control (على s.th.), watch (على over s.th.); to watch out (على for), take care, be heedful, be mindful (على of), look (على after), attend, pay attention (على to); to keep, follow, observe, bear in mind (على s.th.), comply (على with), conform (على to)
; to protect, guard, defend (ھ and على, also عن s.th.) IV to vex, annoy, gall, irritate, hurt, offend (ه s.o.) V to keep up, maintain, preserve (ب s.th.); to observe, keep in mind (ب s.th.), be mindful, be heedful, take care (ب of s.th.), be concerned (ب with); to be cautious, be wary, be on one’s guard; to be reserved, aloof; to have reservations VIII to maintain, uphold (ب or ھ s.th., e.g., بحقوقه one’s rights); to keep up, maintain, retain ( ب or ھ s.th., e.g., a posture, a characteristic); to take care, take over custody (ب of s.o.), protect, guard (ب s.o.);
to defend (against encroachment), hold, maintain (ب a possession); to preserve, sustain, continue, keep up (ب s.th.); to hold, possess (ب s.th.); to put away, hold, have in safekeeping (ب s.th.), take care (ب of s.th.); to keep, retain (ب s.th.); لنفسه احتفظ to keep for o.s., appropriate, reserve for
o.s. (ب or ھ s.th.), take complete possession (ھ of) X to ask s.o. (ه) to guard or protect (ھ or على s.th.); to entrust (على or ه ھ to s.o. s.th.), commit s.th. (على or ھ) to the charge of s.o. (ه)
حفظ ḥifẓ preservation; maintenance, sustentation, conservation, upholding; protection, defense, guarding; custody, safekeeping. keeping, storage; retention; observance, compliance (with); memorizing, memorization; memory; (jur.) discontinuance, stay, suspension (of legal action, of a judicial investigation) │ اآلثار حفظpreservation of ancient monuments (Eg.); الصحة حفظ ḥ. aṣ-ṣiḥḥa hygiene, sanitation; الحفظ رجال police
حفظة ḥifẓa anger, indignation, resentment, rancor
حفاظ ḥifāẓ pl. -āt dressing, ligature, bandage │ الحيض حفاظ ḥ. al-ḥaiḍ sanitary napkin
حفيظ ḥafīẓ attentive, heedful, mindful; preserving, keeping, guarding (على s.th.)
حفيظة ḥafīẓa pl. حفائظ ḥafā’iẓ  grudge, resentment, rancor
محفظة maḥfaẓa, miḥfaẓa pl. -āt, محافظ maḥāfiẓ  folder, bag, satchel, briefcase dispatch case, portfolio; wallet, pocket, book
محفظة miḥfaẓa capsule
تحفيظ taḥfīẓ memorization drill, inculcation (esp. of the Koran)
حفاظ ḥifāẓ defense, protection, guarding (esp. of cherished, sacred things); preservation, maintenance (على of interests); keeping, upholding (of loyalty), adherence (to a commitment)
محافظة muḥāfaẓa guarding; safeguarding; preservation; protection, defense; conservation, sustaining, upholding; retention, maintenance (على of s.th.) conservativism (pol.), conservative
 attitude; following, observance (على of s.th.), compliance (على with s.th.), adherence (على to); guarding (من against misfortune), saving (من from misadventure); garrison (mil.); (pl. -āt) governorate (one of five administrative divisions of Egypt, in addition to a mudīrīyāt); office of the muḥāfiẓ (head of a governorate); province, anyone of the larger administrative districts (Syr.) │ النفس على المحافظة self-preservation; مذھب المحافظة madhab al-m. conservative movement, conserativism, Toryism
تحفظ taḥaffuẓ caution, wariness, restraint, reticence, reserve, aloofness; -- 189 (pl. -āt) precaution, precautionary measure; reservation, limiting condition, conditional stipulation, proviso │التحفظ مع with full reservation
تحفظي taḥaffuẓī precautionary, preventive │تحفظية اجراءات (ijrā’āt) precautionary measures; تحفظي صلح (ṣulḥ) settlement before action, preventive settlement (jur.)
احتفاظ iḥtifāẓ guarding, safeguarding; preservation; retention, maintenance, continuation, conservation, defense, protection, vindication, sustaining, upholding; keeping, holding, safekeeping, custody (ب of s.th.)
حافظ ḥāfiẓ keeper, guarder, guardian, custodian, caretaker; (pl. القرآن حفاظ ḥuffāẓ, حفظة ḥafaẓa) one who knows the Koran by heart (formerly an honorific epithet)
حافظة ḥāfiẓa memory; -- (pl. حوافظ ḥawāfiẓ) wallet, pocketbook, money order (Eg.)
محفوظ maḥfūẓ kept, held in safekeeping, deposited, guarded, preserved; memorized, committed to memory, etc.; conserved, preserved (food); reserved; ensured, secured, safeguarded; -- pl. محفوظات canned goods, concerves; archives; memorized material, what s.o. knows by heart │ المصرية المحفوظات دار the Egyptian Public Record Office; مأكوالت محفوظة concerves, canned goods; جميع محفوظة الحقوق all rights reserved
محافظ muḥāfiẓ supervisory, controlling; observing (على s.th.), complying (على
with), etc.; conservative (pol.), المحافظون the Conservatives, the Tories; keeper, guarder, guardian, custodian, caretaker, supervisor, superintendent; mayor; governor (Eg.: title of the chief officer of a governorate; Syr.: chief officer of a province); director general, president (= Brit. governor)
متحفظ mutaḥaffiẓ vigilant, alert, wary, cautious; reticent, reserved, aloof; staid, sedate
مستحفظ mustaḥfaẓ pl. -āt reserve (mil.)
حفل ḥafala i (ḥafl) to gather, assemble, congregate; to flow copiously; to be replete, teem, superabound (ب with); to pay attention, attend, give one’s mind (ب or ل to s.th.), concern o.s. (ب with), make much (ب of), set great store (ب by) │ ال به حفل(lā ḥafla) indifferent, of no consequence II to adorn, decorate, ornament (ه ب s.th. with) VIII to gather,
rally, throng together; to celebrate (ب s.th., s.o.); to concern o.s. (ب or ل with), attend, pay attention. give one’s mind (ب or ل to s.th.); to honor, welcome, receive kindly ( ب s.o.)
حفل ḥafl gathering, meeting, assembling; assembly, congregation, throng, crowd; performance, show, public event; celebrations; feast, festival
حفلة ḥafla pl. -āt assembly, gathering, meeting, congregation; party; (social or public) event; show, performance (theater, cinema); concert; festivity, ceremony, festival, festive event, celebration │ حفلة التأبينcommemoration. Commemorative, ceremony for a deceased person; الحفلة األولى (ūlā) premiere; حافلة حفلة numerous assembly; خيرية حفلة (ḳairīya) charity performance, charity event; الدفن حفلة  ad- dfn funeral ceremony, obsequies; دينية حفلة (dīnīya) religious ceremony, Divine Service; ساھرة حفلة and سمر حفلة ḥ. samar evening party, soirée; سينمائية حفلة motion- picture show; الشاي حفلة tea party; العرس حفلة ḥ. al-‘urs wedding;االستقبال حفلة (public) reception; موسيقية حفلة  concert
حفيل ḥafīl eager, assiduous, diligent
محفل maḥfil pl. محافل maḥāfil  assembly, congregation, meeting, gathering; party;
 190 body, collective whole; circle, quarter
│ماسوني محفل Masonic lodge; الرسمية المحافل السياسية)) (rasmīya, siyāsīya) the official (political) circles or quarters
احتفال iḥtifāl pl. -āt celebration, ceremony, festival, festivities
حافل ḥāfil pl. حفل ḥuffal, حوافل ḥawāfil  full (ب of), filled, replete (ب with); abundant, copious, lavish; much frequented, well attended (by visitors, participants, etc.), numerous (of attendance); solemn, ceremonial, festive
حافلة hāfila pl. -āt, حوافل ḥawāfil   O autobus
محتفل muḥtafil: المحتفلون the participants in a festive event, the celebrators
محتفل muḥtafal assembly place, gathering place; party; به محتفل celebrated
حفن ḥafana u to scoop up with both hands (ھ s.th.); to give a little (ل to s.o.)
حفنة ḥafna pl. ḥafanāt handful
 (حفو and حفي (حفى ḥafiya a (حفاوة ḥafāwa) to receive kindly and hospitably, to welcome, receive with honors, honor (ب s.o.) V to behave with affection, be affectionate (ب toward) VIII do.; to celebrate (ب an occasion, a festival)
حفي ḥafīy welcoming, receiving kindly, greeting (ب s.o., s.th.)
حفاوة ḥafāwa friendly reception, welcoming, welcome, salutation (ب of s.o.)
احتفاء iḥtifā’ reception, welcome, salutation (ب of s.o.); celebration, festivity
  حفيḥafiya a (حفاء ḥafā’) to go barefoot; to have sore feet
حاف ḥāfin pl. حفاة ḥufāh barefoot(ed)
حق ḥaqqa i u to be true, turn out to be true, be confirmed; to be right, correct; (also pass. ḥuqqa) to be necessary, obligatory, requisite, imperative (على for s.o.), be incumbent (على upon s.o.); to be adequate, suitable, fitting, appropriate (على for s.o.); to be due (ل s.o.); له يحق he is entitled to it, he has a right to it; عليه حق he deserved it (punishment); -- u to ascertain (ھ s.th.), make sure, be sure (ھ of s.th.); to
recognize. identify (ه s.o.) II to make s.th. (ھ) come true; to realize (ھ s.th., e.g., a hope), carry out (ھ e.g., a wish), carry into effect, fulfill, put into action, consummate, effect, actualize (ھ s.th.); to implement (ھ e.g., an agreement); to produce, bring on, yield (ھ results); to determine, ascertain, find out, pinpoint, identify (ھ s.th.); to prove s.th. (ھ) to be true, verify, establish, substantiate (ھ s.th.); to confirm, assert, aver, avouch, affirm (ھ s.th.); to be exact, painstaking, meticulous, careful (ھ in doing s.th.), e.g., النظر حقق (naẓara) to look closely; to  study, examine, investigate, explore (ھ s.th.), look, inquire (ھ into s.th.); to verify, check (ھ or في s.th.); to investigate (في s.th., police); to make an official inquiry ( ھ into s.th.), institute an investigation (ھ of or into; court; jur.); to interrogate (مع s.o.), conduct a hearing (مع of s.o.; jur.) III to contend for a right (ه with s.o.), contest or litigate a right (ه against s.o.) IV to tell the truth; to be right (في in s.th.); to enforce (ھ s.th., e.g., a legal claim) V to prove true. turn out to be true, be confirmed, prove to be correct; to materialize, become a fact; to be realized, be effected, come into effect; to be examined, be explored; to ascertain (ھ s.th., also من), make sure, reassure o.s., gain proof, convince o.s., be convinced, be sure, be certain (ھ of s.th.); to check, verify (ھ or من. s.th.); to be serious (ب about s.th.) X to be entitled, have a claim ( ھ to s.th.); to claim (ھ s.th.), lay claim (ھ to); to deserve, merit (ھ s.th.), be worthy ( ھ of); to require, demand, 191 necessitate, make requisite (ھ s.th.); to fall due. become payable (sum of money), mature. become due (note); to be due (ل s.o.) │ الذكر يستحق (dikra) worth mentioning, noteworthy; الرسم عليه يستحق ال (rasmu) not subject to a fee. free of charge
حق ḥaqq truth; correctness, rightness; rightful possession. property; one’s due; duty; proper manner; true, authentic, real; right, fair and reasonable; correct, sound, valid; الحق an attribute of God; (pl. حقوق ḥuqūq) right, title, claim, legal claim (في to); الحقوق law, jurisprudence, legal science; حقا ḥaqqan really, in reality, in effect, actually, in fact, indeed, truly, in
 truth; justly, rightly, by rights │ذلك؟ احقا is that (really) so? really? بحق justly, rightly, by rights; بالحق truly, in reality, actually; properly, appropriately, in a suitable manner; بحق bi-haqqi and حق في as to ..., as for ..., with respect to, concerning, regarding; حق على ھو he is in the right; الحق معن you are right; عليك الحق you are wrong; عليك حق ھو it is your duty; عليكم حقي ھذا you owe this to me; عليه لحقھا عرفانا (‘irfānan) in recognition of what he owed her; حقه من he is entitled to it, it is his due; ان حقه من كان he should have ..., he ought to have …; له في الحق he is entitled to ...; يقال والحق  (yuqāl) one may say, it must be admitted, it’s only fair to say, say what you
will ..., ... though (as a parenthetical phrase); المعرفة حق عرف (ḥaqqa l-ma‘rifa) to know exactly, know for certain, know very well, also العلم حق علم (ḥaqqa l-‘ilm); الفھم حق فھم fahima ḥaqqa l-fahm to understand precisely, comprehend thoroughly, be fully aware; الحقة السعادة (sa‘āda) true happiness; الحقوق كلية kullīyat al-ḥ. law school, faculty of law
حق ḥuqq hollow, cavity; socket of a joint (anat.); also = حقة ḥuqqa
حقة ḥuqqa pl. حقق ḥuqaq, حقاق ḥiqāq, احقاق aḥqāq small box, case, pot or jar; receptacle, container; -- (pl. -āt, حقق ḥuqaq) a weight (Syr., Pal.) = اقة uqqa; حقة ١.٠٨٢ = استانبولية kg (Ir.)
احق aḥaqq  worthier, more deserving (
ب of s.th.); more entitled (ب to s.th.)
حقيق ḥaqīq pl. احقاء aḥiqqā’  worthy, deserving (ب of s.th.), fit, competent, qualified; entitled (ب to)
حقيقة ḥaqīqa pl. حقائق ḥaqā’iq  truth, reality (also philos.); fact; the true state of affairs, the facts; true nature, essence; real meaning, true sense; ḥaqīqatan really, in reality, in effect, actually, in fact, indeed, truly, in truth │ حقيقته على رأيته I saw its true nature, as it really is; األمر حقيقة في in reality, really, actually; حقيقة له ليس it does not really exist, it is not real
حقيقي ḥaqīqī real, true; actual; proper, intrinsic, essential; genuine; authentic; positive
حقوقي ḥuqūqī juristic(al); (pl. -ūn) jurist, jurisprudent, lawyer
احقية aḥaqqīya legal claim, title, right
حقاني ḥaqqānī correct, right, proper, sound, valid, legitimate, legal
حقانية ḥaqqānīya justice, law │ وزارة الحقانية Ministry of Justice (formerly Eg.)
تحقيق taḥqīq realization, actualization, effectuation, implementation; fulfillment (of a claim, of a wish, etc.); achievement, accomplishment, execution; ascertainment, determination, identification, verification; substantiation; assertion, affirmation, confirmation; pinpointing, precise determination; exactness, accurateness, precision; (= تحقيق النطق t. an-nuṭq) precise pronunciation; -- (pl. -āt) verification, check, checkup, investigation; official or judicial inquiry, 192 inquest │ان التحقيق it is a matter of fact that ..., it is certain that ...; التحقيق على properly speaking, strictly speaking, actually; exactly, precisely; positively, definitely; التحقيق عند properly speaking, strictly speaking, actually; الشخصية تحقيق t. aš-šaḳšīya identification (of a person), proof of identity; الشخصية تحقيق شھادة šahādat t. aš-šaḳšīya identity card; تحقيق قلم الشخصية qalam t. aš-š. bureau of identification; الذاتية تحقيق t. ad-dātīya identification; التحقيق قاضي examining magistrate; األرباح تحقيق realization of profits (stock market)
li-l-ḥaqq iḥqāqan احقاقا للحق iḥqāq: احقاق
(so) that truth may prevail
تحقق taḥaqquq ascertainment, making sure; conviction, certainty, certitude; verification, check, checkup
استحقاق istiḥqāq pl. -āt worthiness, deservingness, merit; one’s due or desert; maturity, payability, falling due (of a sum of money); reclaiming or calling in of s.th. due, demand of a right; vindication (1.1.
Law), replevin, detinue│استحقاق عن deservedly, justly, by rights; استحقاق بدون undeservedly; االستحقاق تاريخ date of maturity (e.g., of a bond); اللبناني االستحقاق (lubnānī) name of a Lebanese order
 محقوق maḥqūq worthy, deserving (ل ب، of), fit, competent, qualifying (ل ب، for); wrong, at fault, on the wrong track
محقق muḥaqqiq investigator; inquirer; examining magistrate
محقق muḥaqqaq sure, certain, beyond doubt, unquestionable, indubitable; assured, established, accepted, recognized
│ ان المحقق منit is certain that ..., it is a fact that …
محق muḥiqq telling the truth, in the right, being right
محقق mutaḥaqqiq convinced, sure, certain, positive
مستحق mustaḥiqq entitled; claiming; beneficiary (of a wakf); deserving, worthy
│الدفع مستحق m. ad-daf‘ due, payable (sum)
حقب VITI to put into one's bag, to bag (ھ s.th.)
ḥiqāb حقاب aḥqāb, احقاب pl. ḥuqb حقب
long stretch of time, long period
حقبة ḥiqba pl. حقب ḥiqab long time, stretch of time; period, age │ الزمان من حقبة ḥiqbatan min az-zamān for quite a time, for some time
حقب ḥaqab pl. احقاب aḥqāb a kind of ornamental belt
حقاب ḥiqāb pl. حقب ḥuqub a kind of ornamental belt
حقيبة ḥaqība pl. حقائب ḥaqā’ib  valise, suitcase, traveling bag; leather bag │ حقيبة دبلوماسية diplomatic pouch; النقود حقيبة portemonnaie, change purse; اليد حقيبة ḥ.
al-yad ladies’ purse, handbag
حقد ḥaqida a, ḥaqada i (ḥaqd, ḥiqd) to harbor feelings of hatred (على against) IV to incite to hatred or resentment, embitter, envenom (ه s.o.) V = I; VI to hate one another
ḥuqūd حقود aḥqād, احقاد pl. ḥiqd حقد
hatred, malice, spite, resentment, rancor
حقيدة ḥaqida pl. حقائد ḥaqā’id  hatred, malice, spite, resentment, rancor
حقود ḥaqūd full of hatred, spiteful, resentful, malicious, malevolent, rancorous
حاقد ḥāqid full of hatred, spiteful, resentful, malicious, malevolent, rancorous; pl. حقدة ḥaqada malevolent people
حقر ḥaqara i (ḥaqr) to despise, scorn, disdain (ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to look down (ه ھ، on), have a low opinion (ه ھ، of); -- ḥaqura u 193 to below, base, contemptible, despicable; to be despised, degraded, humiliated II to disparage, decry, depreciate (ه s.o.), detract, derogate (ه from s.o.); to degrade, debase, humble, humiliate; to regard with contempt, despise, scorn, disdain (ه s.o., ھ s.th.) VIII to despise, scorn, disdain (ه s.o., ھ s.th.), look down (ه ھ، on) X to regard as contemptible or despicable, disdain, despise (ه s.o., ھ s.th.), look down (ه ھ، on)
حقير ḥaqīr pl. حقراء ḥuqarā’  low, base, mean, vulgar, vile; little, small, paltry, inconsiderable, poor, wretched, miserable; despised; despicable, contemptible
احقر aḥqar  lower, baser, more contemptible
حقارة ḥaqāra lowness, vulgarity, baseness, vileness, meanness; smallness, paltriness, insignificance, poorness, wretchedness, miserableness; despicability, contemptibleness; ignominy, infamy
تحقتر taḥqīr contempt, disdain, scorn; degradation, humiliation, abasement
│ scorn disdain, contempt, iḥtiqār احتقار regard to l-iḥt.) (bi-‘ainiنظر اليه بعين االحتقار
s.o. with contempt, look down one’s nose at s.o.
محتقر muḥtaqar despised; contemptible, despicable
حقل ḥaql pl. حقول ḥuqūl field (also fig. = domain); column │ البترول حقولoil fields; الزيت حقل ḥ. az-zait, النفط حقل ḥ. an-nafṭ oil field; oil area; التجارب حقول experimental fields; كھربائي حقل (kahrabā’ī) electric field
حقلي ḥaqlī field- (in compounds)
محاقلة muḥāqala sale of grain while still in growth, dealing in grain futures (Isl.
Law)
 حقن ḥaqana u (ḥaqn) to hold back, withhold, keep back, detain, retain (ھ s.th.); to suppress, repress, restrain (ھ s.th.); to keep to o.s. (السر as-sirra the secret); to spare (دمه damahū s.o.’s blood or life); to give (ه s.o.) an injection (med.) VIII to become congested (esp. blood); to suffer from strangury; to take an enema, a clyster; to be injected │وجھه احتقن (wajhahū) his face was flushed, his face turned red
حقن ḥaqn retention, withholding; sparing; injecting. injection (med.) │ حقنا لدمائھم ḥaqnan li-dimā’ihim in order to spare their blood; الوريد حبل في حقن intravenous injection (med.)
حقنة ḥuqna pl. حقن ḥuqan injection (med.); hypodermic; clyster; enema
maḥāqin  محاقن pl. miḥqana محقنة
syringe (med.)
احتقان iḥtiqān congestion │ الدم احتقان iḥt. ad-dam vascular congestion
محتقن muḥtaqan reddened by blood congestion, flushed, red (face)
حقو ḥaqw pl. حقاء ḥiqā’, احقاء aḥqā’ loin, groin
│حقويه شدد šaddada ḥaqwaihi to gird one’s loins
 حك ḥakka u (ḥakk) to rub, chafe; to scrape; to scratch; to rub off, scrape off, scratch off, abrade (ھ s.th.) │ صدره في حك (ṣadrihī) it impressed him, affected him, touched s.th. inside him IV to itch V to rub o.s., scrape, chafe (ب against); to pick a quarrel (ب with s.o.) VI to rub or scrape against each other VIII to rub o.s. scrape, chafe (ب against); to be in contact, in touch (ب with) │ صدره في احتك (ṣadrihī) it impressed him, affected him, touched s.th. inside him
حك ḥakk rubbing, chafing; friction; scratching
حك ḥakka itching; scabies, itch (med.)
حكاك ḥakkāk lapidary 194
محك miḥakk touchstone; test │على ثبت النظر محك tabata ‘alā m. in-naẓar to stand a critical test
محكة miḥakka currycomb
تحاك taḥākk (reciprocal) friction
احتكاك iḥtikāk pl. -āt (reciprocal) friction; close touch or contact; friction (fig., = dissension, controversy) │غير من احتكاك min gair ḥt. frictionless
محكك muḥakkak chafed, worn away
 حكة ḥukka (tun., = ḥuqqa) pl. حكك ḥukak small box, case, pot or jar
حكر VIII to buy up, hoard and withhold, corner (ھ a commodity); to monopolize (ھ a commercial article); to have exclusive possession (ھ of s.th.), hold a monopoly ( ھ over s.th.)
al-ḥ. ujrat اجرة الحكر and ḥukr ḥikr, حكر
ground rent, quitrent
حكر ḥakar, ḥukar hoarded
حكرة ḥukra hoarding (of goods); monopoly
حاكورة ḥākūra small vegetable garden
احتكار iḥtikār pl. -āt cornering, buying up; monopoly; preferential position; supremacy, hegemony │ البن تجارة احتكارal- bunn coffee-trade monopoly; السكر احتكار iḥ. as-sukkar sugar monopoly
احتكاري iḥtikārī rapacious, grasping, greedy
حكم ḥakama u (ḥukm) to pass judgment, express an opinion (في على، on s.th.), judge (على s.th., ب by, from); to decide, give a decision, pass a verdict, pass sentence (على on); to sentence (على s.o., ب to a penalty; said of the judge), impose, inflict (ب a penalty) on s.o. (على); to pronounce a verdict or judgment, deliver judgment, rule (ل in s.o.’s favor); to adjudicate, adjudge, award (ل ب to s.o. s.th.); to take ( ب s.th.) as a standard or norm; to have judicial power, have jurisdiction, have authority (على and ه over), govern, rule, dominate, control (على or ه s.o.); to order, command (ب s.th.); to bridle, check, curb ( ھ ه، s.th., s.o.) │ باالعدام عليه حكم (ḥukima, i‘dām) he was sentenced to death; حكم بإدانته (bi-idānatihī) to convict s.o., find
s.o. guilty (jur.); ببراءته حكم (bi-barā’atihi) to acquit s.o. (jur.) II to appoint (ه s.o.) as ruler; to choose (ه s.o.) as arbitrator, make (ه s.o.) the judge (في over or in s.th., بين between) III to prosecute (ه s.o.); to arraign, bring to trial, hale into court (ه
 s.o.); to interrogate, hear (ه s.o.) IV to make (ھ s.th.) firm, strong, sturdy, solid; to fortify (ھ s.th.); to strengthen, consolidate (ھ s.th.); to do well, do expertly, master (ھ field, work), be proficient (ھ in) │ امره احكم (amrahu) to do s.th. thoroughly, carefully, properly; احكم الباب قفل (qafla l-bāb) to lock the door firmly; لغة احكم (lugatan) to master a language V to have one's own way (في in), proceed (في with) at random, at will, handle (في s.th.) arbitrarily; to pass arbitrary judgment (في on); to make o.s. the judge (على of), pass judgment (على on); to decide (ب on); to rule, reign, hold sway (في over); to dominate, control (في s.th.), be in control, be in command (في of) VI to bring one another before the judge (الى الحاكم); to appeal (الى to) for a legal decision; to be interrogated, be heard (in court) VIII to have one’s own way (في in), proceed (في with, in s.th.) at will, at random, handle (في s.th.) arbitrarily, judge arbitrarily; to rule, reign, hold sway (على، في over); to be in control, be in possession (على of); to appeal (الى to) for a legal decision, seek a decision (الى from), have
s.o. (الى) decide X to be strong, sturdy, solid, firm; to become stronger, be strengthened, be 195 consolidated; to take root, be or become deep-rooted, deep- seated, ingrained, inveterate, marked, pronounced (feeling, trait)
حكم ḥukm pl. احكام aḥkām judgment, valuation, opinion; decision, (legal) judgment, verdict, sentence; condemnation, conviction; administration of justice; jurisdiction, legal consequence of the facts of a case (Isl. Law); regulation, rule, provision, order, ordinance, decree; judiciousness, wisdom, judgeship, command, authority, control, dominion, power; government, regime; pl. احكام statutes, by-laws, regulations, rules, provisions, stipulations, principles, precepts; حكما ḥukman virtually; legally │ بحكم bi-ḥukmi by virtue of, on the strength of, pursuant to, by force of; حكم في as good as, all but, e.g., حكم في ھو (fī ḥukm l-‘adam) it is as good as nothing, it is practically nonexistent; المقرر حكم في اصبح aṣbaḥa fī ḥukmi l-muqarrar it is all but decided, كان الشيء حكم في also: to be subject to s.th.; نزل
حكمه على to give in, yield to s.o., البراءة حكم ḥ. al-barā’a acquittal, حضوري حكم (ḥuḍūrī) judgment delivered in the presence of the litigant parties, after oral proceedings (jur.), باالعدام الحكم (i‘dām) death sentence; غيابي حكم (giyābī) judgment by default (jur.); الذاتي الحكم (dātī) self-determination, autonomy (pol.); الجمھوري الحكم (jumhūrī) the republican form of government, the republican regime; المطلق الحكم (muṭlaq) the absolute, i.e., authoritarian, regime, الحكم النھائي (niyābī) the parliamentary regime, parliamentarianism; الحكم لجنة lajna al-ḥ. board of examiners, review board; االحكام العرفية (‘urfīya) martial law; انتقالية احكام (intiqālīya) provisional regulations (jur.); ختامية احكام (ḳitāmīya) final regulations (jur.); خاصة احكام (ḳāṣṣa) special regulations; حكمه سن لكل (sinn) every age has its own set of rules, must be judged by its own standards, احكام للضرورة (li-ḍ- ḍarūra) necessity has its (own) rules, (approx.: necessity knows no law)
حكمي ḥukmī legal
حكمدار (eg.; pronounced ḥikimdār) commandant; chief of police
حكمدارية (eg.; pronounced ḥikimdārīya) commandant’s office
حكم ḥakam pl. حكام ḥukkām arbitrator, arbiter; umpire, referee
حكمة ḥikma pl. حكم ḥikam wisdom; sagacity; philosophy, maxim, rationale, underlying reason │ لحكمة (with foll. genit.) on account of, because of
حكمي ḥikmī gnomic, aphoristic, expressing maxims │ الحكمي الشعر (ši'r) gnomic poetry
حكمة ḥakama pl. -āt bit (of a horse’s bridle)
حكيم ḥakīm pl. حكماء ḥukamā’  wise, judicious; wise man, sage; philosopher; physician, doctor
حكيمباشي ḥakīmbāšī senior physician, chief surgeon
حكومة ḥukūma pl. -āt government
حكومي ḥukūmī of government, governmental; official, state-owned, state- controlled of the state, state- (in compounds)
 احكم aḥkam  wiser
محكمة maḥkama pl. محاكم maḥākim  court, tribunal │ االستئناف محكمة m. al- isti’nāf court of appeal, appellate court; اھلية محكمة (ahlīya) indigenous court (Eg.; jurisdiction limited to Egyptian nationals), ابتدائية محكمة (ibtidā’īya) court of first instance, كلية ابتدائية محكمة (kullīya) civil court with jurisdiction in cases of major importance, at the same time appellate instance of جزئية محاكم (Eg.); 196 محكمة جزئية (juz’īya) in Eg., lowest court of both اھلية محاكم (approx.: district courts) and of شرعية محاكم canonical courts (with jurisdiction in marital and family matters); summary court; الجنايات محكمة m. al-jinīyāt criminal court; الشخصية األحوال محاكم (šaḳṣīya) courts dealing with vital statistics; مختلطة محكمة (muḳtaliṭa) mixed court (with jurisdiction over residents of foreign nationality); شرعية محكمة (šar’īya) canonical court (administering justice on the basis of the Sharia), court dealing with family matters of Muslims; مركزية محكمة (markazīya) county court, dealing with minor offenses, esp. misdemeanors (Eg.); االداري القضاء محكمة m. al-qaḍā’ al-idārī administrative court; واالبرام النقض محكمة m. an-naqḍ wa-l-ibrām Court of Cassation, the highest court of appeal in Egypt;
التمييز محكمة Court of Cassation (Syr., Leb.
ساحة المحاكم Eg.); in محكمة النقض واالبرام =
tribunals
تحكيم taḥkīm appointment of an arbitrator; arbitration; arbitral decision, award; pl. تحكيمات fortifications │ تحكيم الحال starting from the present state of a court’s findings (Isl. Law); التحكيم ھيئة hai’at at-t. board of arbitration; jury, committee of judges, committee of umpires (in sports), committee of referees (in mil. maneuvers); تحكيمية لجنة (lajna) do.
محاكمة muḥākama judicial proceeding; trial, hearing (in court); legal prosecution
احكام iḥkām perfection; accuracy, exactness, exactitude, precision; exact performance, precise execution │ باالحكامaccurately, exactly, precisely; في بالغ االحكام of highest perfection
تحكم taḥakkum arbitrariness, arbitrary powers or action; despotism; domination,
dominion, rule, sway, power; control (في of, over)
تحكمي taḥakkumī arbitrary; despotic
استحكام istiḥkām intensification, increase, strengthening; consolidation, stabilization; fortification; pl. استحكامات fortifications
حاكم ḥākim ruling, governing; decisive;
--(pl. -ūn, حكام ḥukkām) ruIer, sovereign; governor; judge │ حاكم(bi-amrihī) autocratic; autocrat, dictator; عام حاكم (‘āmm) governor general; المباراة حاكم al- mubārāh umpire, referee (athlet.); حاكم الصلح ḥ. aṣ-ṣulḥ (Syr.) justice of the peace; الناحية حاكم ḥ. an-nāḥiya (Tun.) district magistrate
حاكمية ḥākimīya domination, dominion, rule, sovereignty; judgeship, judicature, jurisdiction (ir.)
ب( sentenced ‘alaih maḥkūm محكوم عليه those (i‘dām)محكوم عليھم باالعدام │ to) (fašal) محكوم عليه بالفشل death; to sentenced fail to doomed
محكم muḥakkam pl. -ūn arbitrator, arbiter; umpire, referee (في in, over)
محكم muḥkam strengthened, reinforced; firm, solid, sturdy; tight, taut; perfect, masterly, masterful; well-aimed (blow, hit); accurate, precise, exact │ التدبير محكم well-planned, well-contrived
مستحكم mustaḥkam reinforced, fortified; strengthened, consolidated, strong; inveterate, deep-seated, deep-rooted, ingrained (custom, trait, etc.); pl. مستحكمات defenses, fortifications
حكم see حكمدار، حكمدارية
حكى ḥakā i (حكاية ḥikāya) to tell, relate ( ھ s.th.), report, give an account (ھ of); to speak, talk (syr., leb.); to imitate, copy (ھ s.th.); to resemble (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) III to imitate, copy (ھ s.th.), assimilate o.s. (ھ to); to be similar (ھ to), be like s.th. (ھ), resemble (ھ s.th.), be attuned, adjusted, adapted (ھ to), be in harmony (ھ with) 197 حكاية ḥikāya pl. -āt story, tale, narrative, accountj (gram.) literal quotation (of the words of others)
محاكاة muḥākāh imitation; similarity, resemblance; harmony
 حاك ḥākin narrator, storyteller; phonograph; O loudspeaker, radio
محكي maḥkīy imitated, imitation (adj.)
حكم see حكيمباشي
 حل ḥalla u (ḥall) to untie (ھ a knot), unbind, unfasten, unravel, undo (ھ s.th.); to solve (ھ a problem, a puzzle); to decipher, decode (ھ s.th.): to dissolve in water (ھ s.th.; chem.); to resolve (ھ s.th. into its components), analyze (ھ s.th.); to melt (ھ s.th.); to decompose, disintegrate ( ھ s.th.); to disband, break up, dissolve (ھ an organization or party, parliament); to open, unpack (ھ a package, and the like); to loosen, relax (ھ s.th.); to release, set free, let go (ھ s.th., ه s.o.); to clear, exonerate, exculpate (ه من s.o. from), absolve (ه s.o., من from his sins; Ch,.); pass. ḥulla to be free; to be relaxed; -- i u ( حلول ḥulūl) to dismount, alight, stop, halt; to settle down, stay (ب at a place, also في and على ھ؛ with s.o., at s.o.’s house), come (for a visit, على to); to take up residence (ھ in a place or country); to descend, come down; to descend (على upon s.o.; wrath); to overcome, overwhelm (على s.o.; sleep); to befall (ب and على s.o.; punishment, suffering), occur, happen (ب to s.o.); to become incarnate (في in s.o.; God); to set in, arrive, begin (time, season); -- i to pass into solution, dissolve: to fade (color); -- i (ḥill) to be allowed, permitted, permissible, lawful; to be due, payable (debt) │منصب في حل (manṣib) to take over or hold an office; محله حل (maḥallahū) to be in the right place; محل حل فالن، محل حل الشيء (maḥalla) to take the place of s.o. or s.th., replace, supersede s.o. or s.th., substitute for s.o. or s.th.; محال قلبه في حلت (qalbihī) she held a place in his heart; حل لديه التقدير محل (maḥalla t-taqdīri ladaihi) to enjoy s.o.’s. high esteem; القراء نفوس من حل محل (min nufūsi l-qurrā’i maḥalla l- istiḥsān) to appeal to the readers, meet with the readers' approval II to dissolve, resolve (into its component parts), break up, decompose, analyze (ھ s.th.): to make a chemical analysis (ھ of s.th.): to be dissolvent, act as a solvent (ھ on; med.): to discharge, absolve, clear, exonerate, exculpate (ه s.o.); (تحلة taḥilla) to expiate an oath: to make permissible or lawful,
legitimate, sanction, justify, warrant (ھ s.th.); to declare permissible or lawful, allow, permit (ھ s.th.) IV to discharge, release, absolve, disengage (ه من s.o. from); to declare (ھ s.th.) lawful, legally permissible, permit, allow (ھ s.th.); to cause to set in or occur, bring about, produce, cause to take root, establish, stabilize (ھ s.th.): to cause (ھ s.th.) to take or occupy the place (ھ of), shift, move, translocate (ھ ھ s.th., e.g., a tribe, to a place); to settle (ھ بين s.th. among) │احله محل (maḥallahū) to cause s.o. or s.th. to take the place of s.o. or s.th. else, replace
s.o. or s.th. by, substitute s.o. or s.th. for, take s.o. or s.th. as substitute for; الشيء أحل العناية محل (maḥalla l-‘ināya) to pay attention to s.th., make s.th. one’s concern V to dissolve, melt, disintegrate; to disengage o.s., disassociate o.s., extricate o.s., free o.s. (من from) VII to be untied (knot); to be solved, be unraveled (problem); to be dissolved, be broken up, be disbanded (also, of an organization, a party, etc.); to dissolve, melt; to become
.lock, limp, weak, loose, relaxed; to disintegrate; to melt away VIII to settle down (ھ at a place); to occupy (mil., ھ a territory); to assume, take over, occupy, hold, have (ھ a place, 198 a rank, an office) │األول المكان احتل (al-makāna l- awwala) to occupy the foremost place; أعماله احتل (a‘mālahū) to take over s.o.’s functions X to regard (ھ s.th.) as permissible or lawful, think that one may do s.th. (ھ); to regard as fair game, as easy prey, seize unlawfully, misappropriate, usurp (ھ s.th.)
حل ḥall pl. حلول ḥulūl untying, unfastening, undoing (of a knot); solution (of a problem, of a puzzle, etc.); unriddling, unraveling, explanation; solution (chem.); dissolution, disbandment, breaking up (of all organization, etc.), abolition, cancellation, annulment; release, freeing, liberation; decontrol, release, unblocking (e.g., of a blocked sum); discharge. clearing, exoneration, exculpation; absolution (Chr.) │للحل قابل soluble, solvable; O الحل الطيفي (ṭaifī) spectral analysis; والعقد الحل اھل ahl al-ḥ. wa-l-‘aqd or والربط الحل اھل (rabṭ) influential people, those in power; حله في
 وترحاله (tarḥālihī) in all his doings, in everything he did
حل ḥill: (من حل في كان (عن (ḥillin) he was free to …, he was at liberty to ...; he had free disposal of ...; من حل في انت you’re free to ..., you may readily ...
حلة ḥalla pl. حلل ḥilal low copper vessel; cooking pot (eg.)
حلة ḥilla way station, stopping place, stop, stopover; encampment; absolution (Chr.); dispensation (Chr.)
حلة ḥulla pl. حلل ḥulal clothing, dress, garb; vestments (ecclesiastic; Chr.); (complete) suit of clothes; (Western) suit
│رسمية حلة (rasmīya) uniform; السھرة حلة ḥ. as-suhra formal dress
حالل ḥalāl that which is allowed, permitted or permissible; allowed, permitted, permissible, allowable, admissible, lawful, legal, licit, legitimate; lawful possession │حالل ابن ibn ḥ. legitimate son; respectable man, decent fellow
حلول ḥulūl stopping, putting up, staying; descending, coming on, befalling, overtaking; incarnation; setting in, advent, arrival (of a time, of a deadline), beginning, dawn; substitution (for s.o.)
حليل ḥalīl pl. احالء aḥillā’  husband حليلة ḥalīla pl. حالئل ḥalā’il  iI' wife احليل iḥlīl outer opening of the urethra;
urethra (anat.)
محل maḥall pl. -āt, محال maḥāll  place, location, spot, site, locale, locality, center; (place of) residence; business; business house, firm, commercial house; store, shop; object, cause (e.g., of dispute, admiration, etc.); gear (automobile) │حل محله and محله احله see حل I and IV; محله (maḥallahū) in his (its) place; محله في in his (its) place, in his (its) stead, instead of him; محله في كان to be in the right place; to be appropriate, expedient, advisable; to be justified, warranted; محله غير في improper, misplaced, unsuitable, ill-suited; out of place; inappropriate, inexpedient, inopportune; محله صادف ṣādafa maḥallahū to be convenient, be most opportune; ال
له محل (maḥalla) there is no room for ... ; it
is out of place, quite déplacé; العمل محل m. al-‘amal place of employment; االقامة محل
m. al-iqāma (place of) residence, address; نجاري محل (tijārī) business house, commercial house; العمومية المحالت (‘umūmīya, tijārīya) public utilities and commercial houses; المحل اسم ism al-m. firm; رھونات محل m. ruhūnāt pawnshop;
السياحة محالالتm. as-siyāḥfa travel agencies; مرطبات محل m. muraṭṭibāt refreshment parlor; اللھو محل m. al-lahw and المالھي محل m. al-malāhī (pl. محال) amusement center; نزاع محل m. nizā‘ object 199 of controversy, controversial matter; لعجب محال ارى ال lā arā m. li-‘ajabin I don’t see any reason for amazement, there is nothing to be astonished about; محل m. naẓar s.th. deserving attention, a striking, remarkable thing
محلي maḥallī local; native, indigenous; parochial; pl. محليات local news, local page (of a newspaper)
محل maḥill due date; date of delivery
محلة maḥalla pl. -āt way station, stopping place, stop, stopover, encampment; camp; section, part, quarter (of a city) │الكبرى المحلة (kubrā) Mahalla el Kubra (city in N Egypt)
تحليل taḥlīl dissolution, resolution, breaking up, decomposition, specification, detailing, analyzation; (pl. تحاليل taḥālīl ) analysis (chem.); absolution (Chr.) │ بالتحليل in detail; تحليل معمل ma‘mal t. laboratory for chemical analyses; تحليل كھربائي (kahrabā’ī) electrolysis; التحليل النفساني) النفسي) (nafsī) psychoanalysis
تحليلي taḥlīlī analytic(al)
تحلل taḥallul dissolution, breakup; separation, disengagement, disassociation
انحالل inḥilāl dissolution, breakup, decomposition; disintegration; decay, putrefaction; slackening, exhaustion, prostration, weakness, impotence
احتالل iḥtilāl occupation (mil.) │جيوش االحتالل occupation forces
احتاللي iḥtilālī occupying, occupation (used attributively); advocate of foreign occupation
 محلول maḥlūl solved; dissolved, resolved, broken up; loose; untied, unfastened, unfettered, free, at large; weakened, prostrate, exhausted, languid; solution (liquid; chem.) │الشعر محلول m. aš-ša‘ar with loose, disheveled hair
محلل muḥallil analyzer
منحل munḥall solved; dissolved, resolved, broken up; disbanded; languid, prostrate, weak; permitted, allowed
محتلة جيوش juyūš muḥtalla occupation forces
حول see حيلولة 
 حلب ḥālaba i u (ḥalb) to milk (ھ an animal) │ اشطره الدھر حلب ḥalaba d-dahra ašṭurahū he has seen good and bad days V to run, drip, trickle, ooze, seep, leak; to water. drool (mouth, with appetite) │له تتحلب األفواه (afwāh) making the mouth water, appetizing; فمي في اللعاب تحلب (al-lu‘ābu fī famī) my mouth was watering VIII to milk (ھ an animal) X do.; to squeeze juice (ھ from)
حلب ḥalb milking
حلب ḥalab milk
حلبة ḥalba pl. ḥalabāt race track; arena; dance floor; race horses │الرقص حلبة ḥ. ar- raqṣ dance floor; الحلبة تلك من ليس انه he is not made for that, he doesn’t belong there, it is not in his line; ب حلبة فارس a master of, excelling or outstanding in
حلبة ḥulba fenugreek (Trigonella foenum-graecum; bot.); tonic, prepared of yellowish grains, for women in childbed (eg., syr.)
حليب ḥalīb milk │حليب لبن laban ḥ. cow’s milk (eg.)
بقرة حلوب│ lactiferous ḥalūb حلوب (māšiya) الماشية الحلوب cow; milk (baqara) cattle dairy
حالب ḥallāb milker
حالبة ḥallāba milkmaid, dairymaid; dairywoman; milk cow 200
محلب maḥlab mahaleb (Prunus mahaleb;
bot.)
حالب ḥālib ureter
مستحلب اللوزemulsion│ mustaḥlab مستحلب
m. al-lauz almond milk
 حلب ḥalab  Aleppo
حلتيت ḥiltīt, ḥaltīt asafetida (Ferula assafoetida;
bot.)
حلج ḥalaja i u (ḥalj, حليج ḥalīj) to gin (ھ cotton)
حلج ḥalj ginning (of cotton)
حليج ḥalīj ginning (of cotton); ginned (cotton)
حالجة ḥilāja cotton ginner’s work or trade
حالج ḥallāj cotton ginner
محالج pl. miḥlaja محلجة miḥlaj, محلج
maḥālij  cotton gin
محلج maḥlaj pl. محالج maḥālij  cotton ginnery
حلحل ḥalḥala to remove, drive away, shove away II taḥalḥala to stir from one’s place; to move, stir, budge
حلزون ḥalazūn snail; spiral
حلزونة ḥalazūna (n. un.) snail; spiral
حلزونى ḥalazūnī spiral, helical, volute, winding
حلس ḥalisa a to remain, stay permanently (ب at a place), stick (ب to a place)
حلس ḥi1s pl. احالس aḥlās (with foll. genit.) one addicted or given to s.th., one adhering to s.th.│اللھو احالس a. al-lahw people given to pleasure and amusement, bons vivants, playboys
ḥulūs حلوس aḥlās, احالس pl. ḥils حلس
saddle blanket
احلس aḥlas , f. حلساء ḥulasā’  bay, chestnut (horse)
حلف ḥalafa i (ḥalf, ḥilf) to swear (<Iبا by God)│ يمينا حلف (yamīnan) to take an oath II to make (ه s.o.) swear; to put to oath, swear in (ه s.o.); to adjure, entreat earnestly (ه s.o.) III to enter into a confederation, into an alliance (ه with s.o.), become an ally (ه of s.o.) VI to commit one another by oath (على to do s.th.), join in alliance; to ally, makc an alliance (مع with) X to make (ه
 s.o.) swear, exact an oath (ه from s.o.); to adjure, entreat earllestly (ه s.o.)
حلف اليمين oath│ swearing, ḥilf ḥalf, حلف
taking the oath
حلف ḥilf sworn alliance, confederacy, league; federation; (pl. احالف aḥlāf) ally│ عسكرى حلف (‘aakarī) military alliancc; االطلنطى الحلف (aṯlanṯī) the Atlantic Pact
حليف ḥaīf pl. حلفاء ḥulafā’  confederate; ally; allied │الحلفاء the Allies (pol.)
حليف of f. -āt pl. ḥalīfa حليفة
حلوف ḥallūf pl. حالليف ḥalālīf  (magr., eg.) wild boar; pig, swine
حلفاء ḥulafā’ and حلفة ḥalfa (bot.) alfa, esparto
لجنة التحليف│ in swearing taḥlīf تحليف
lajnat at-t. the jury (in court)
محالفة muḥālafa alliance
تحالف taḥāluf state of alliance; alliance, treaty of alliance
محلف muḥallaf sworn, bound by oath; (pl. -ūn) juror (in court)
متحالف mutaḥālif interallied, allied
حلق ḥalaqa i (ḥalq) to shave (ھ the head, the face); to shave off (ھ the beard) II to circle in the air, hover; to fly, soar (bird; airplane; على and فوق) over or above s.th.); to round, make round, circular or ring- shaped (ھ Sotho); to 201 ring, surround, encircle (على s.o., s.th.); to clothe V to form a circle, sit in a circle; to gather in a circle (على around s.o.)
حلق ḥalq shaving, shave; (pl. حلوق ḥulūq, احالق aḥlāq) throat, gullet, pharynx
حلقى ḥalqī guttural, pharyngeal
حلق ḥalaq rings, earrings
حلقة ḥalqa, ḥalaqa pl. حلق ḥalaq, حلقات ḥalaqāt ring (also earring, etc.); link (of a chain); circle (also of people); group of students studying under a professor, hence: lecture, course (e.g., at Al Azhar University); part of a sequence or series; ringlet; disk; decade; market│ النجاة حلقة ḥ. an-najāh life buoy, life preserver; Jl- حلقة االتصال ḥ. al-ittiṣāl and الوصل حلقة ḥ. al- waṣl connecting link (بين between; fig.);
the link, missing the الحلقة المفقودة فى الحلقة السادسة من عمره form; intermediate in life, his of decade sixth the in (‘umrihī) حلقة القطن market; fish حلقة االسماك fifties; his market cotton al-quṯn ḥ.
حلقي ḥalaqī annular, ring-shaped, circular
حالق ḥallāq pl. -ūn barber │صحي حالق (ṣiḥḥī), الصحة حالق ḥ. aṣ-ṣiḥḥa barber- surgeon
حليق ḥalīq shaved, shaven, shorn
barber’s shave; shaving, ḥallāqa حالقة shaving al-ḥ. ṣābūn صابون الحالقة │ trade قاعة الحالقة barbershop; صالون الحالقة soap; آلة حالقة O and ماكينة حالقة O do.; al-ḥ. qā‘at razor safety
محلق miḥlaq pl. محالق maḥāliq  straight razor
تحليق taḥlīq flying, flight (of all aircraft; على and فوق over a country); take-off (of an airplane)
حالق من min ḥāliq from above
حلقوم ḥulqūm pl. حالقم ḥalāqim  throat, gullet │ الحلقوم راحة rāḥat al-ḥ. a kind of sweet made of cornstarch, sugar, mastic and pistachios (eg.)
حلك ḥalika a (ḥalak) to be pitch-black, deep- black XII احلولك iḥlaulaka do.
حلك ḥalak intense blackness
حلكة ḥulka intense blackness
حلك ḥalik pitch-black, deep-black; gloomy, murky
حلوكة ḥulūka gloominess, darkness; blackness
حالك ḥālik pitch-black, deep-black; gloomy, murky
حلم ḥalama u to dream (ب or عن of; ان فى of being, becoming, doing, etc., in the future); to muse, reflect, meditate (ب on s.th.); to attain puberty; -- ḥaluma u to be gentle, mild-tempered VIII to attain puberty
حلم ḥulm, pl. احالم aḥlām, dream; pl. irreality, utopia
حلمي ḥulmī dream- (in compounds), of or pertaining to dreams
 حلم ḥulum sexual maturity, puberty │ بلغ الحلمto attain puberty
حلم ḥilm, pl. حلوم ḥulūm, احالم aḥlām gentleness, clemency, mildness; forbearance, indulgence; patience; insight, discernment, understanding, intelligence, reason │ االحالم صغار simpleminded people, simple souls
حلم ḥalam (coll.; n. un. ة) tick; mite; nipple, teat, mammilla (of the female breast)
حلمي ḥalamī parasitic; mammillary, nipple-shaped
حليم ḥalīm, pl. حلماء ḥulamā’   mild, mild- tempered, gentle; patient 202
حلومḥālūm, حالوم ḥālūm a kind of Egyptian cheese
حالم ḥālim pl. -ūn dreamer
محتلم muḥtalim sexually mature, pubescent, marriageable
(حلو and حلى) ḥaluwa u, ḥaliya a, حال ḥalā u ( حالوة ḥalāwa, حلوان ḥulwān) to be sweet; to be pleasant, agreeable (ل to s.o.) │له حال الشيء he enjoyed the thing; ان له حال it pleased him that ..., he was delighted
that ...; له يحلو حسبما (ḥasabamā) at his discretion, as he pleases; -- حلى ḥalā i to adorn, grace; -- حلى ḥaliya a to be adorned (ب with) II to sweeten (II s.th., e.g., a beverage with sugar); to adorn, bedeck, embellish, attire, furnish, provide (ه ھ، s.o., s.th., ب with) V to adorn o.s., be adorned, decked out, embellished, graced, endowed, furnished, provided (ب with) X to find sweet or pleasant, like (ھ s.th.), be delighted (ھ by)
حال ḥalan sweetness, pleasantness
حلو ḥulw sweet; pleasant, nice, charming, delightful, pretty │الحديث حلو a gifted raconteur, amusing, entertaining; الحلوة الغدة (gudda) pancreas (anat.)
حلي ḥaly pl. حلي ḥulīy piece of jewelry, trinket
حلية ḥilya pl. حلى ḥilan, ḥulan decoration, embellishment, finery; ornament
حلوى ḥalwa pl. حالوى ḥalāwa candy, confection, confectionery, sweetmeats
حلواء fi.alwa'2 candy, confection, con· fectionery, sweetmeats
حلويات ḥalwayāt (and eg. ḥalawīyāt) sweets (in general); sweet pastry; candies, confectionery, sweetmeats
حالوة ḥalāwa sweetness; candies, confectionery, sweetmeats; grace, gracefulness, charm, refinement, wittiness, wit; present of money; ransom
│ حمصية حالوة (ḥummuṣīya) a sweet made of roasted chick-peas; طحينية حالوة (ṭahīnīya) a sweet made of sesame-seed meal; لوزية حالوة (lauzīya) a sweet made of almonds
حلوان ḥulwān present of money, gratuity, tip
حلواني ḥalwānī and حلوائي ḥalwā’ī confectioner, candy dealer; pastry cook, fancy baker
احيلى ما mā uḥailā oh, how sweet is ...,
احياله ما oh, how sweet he is!
تحلية taḥliya decoration, embellishment, ornamentation
محلى muḥallan sweetened; decorated, embellished, adorned, ornamented (ب with)
  حم ḥam pl. احماء aḥmā’ father-in-law; pl. relatives of the wife by marriage, in-laws of the wife
حماة ḥamāh pl. حموات ḥamawāt mother- in-law; see also   حمى and  حمى
 حم ḥuma see   حمو
 حم ḥamma u (ḥamm) to heat, make hot (ھ s.th.); pass. ḥumma to be feverish, have a fever │ذلك له حم (ḥumma) that was decreed to him, that is his lot, his destiny II to heat, make hot (ھ s.th.); to bathe, wash (ھ or ه s.o. or s.th.) IV to heat, make hot (ھ s.th.) X to bathe, take a bath
حمة ḥamma hot spring
حمة ḥumma blackness, swarthiness, dark coloration; fever
حمم ḥumam (n. un. ة) charcoal; anything charred or carbonized; ashes, cinder; lava
حمى ḥumma f., pl. حميات ḥummayāt
الحمى and الحمى التيفودية│ heat fever fever,
 fever; typhus fever, typhoid (tīfīya) التيفية ḥ. حمى الربع fever; hectic d-diqq ḥ. حمى الدق relapsing الحمى الراجعة fever; quartan r-rib‘ الحمى الصفراوية or الحمى الصفراء fever; حمى الغب fever; yellow ṣafrāwīya) (ṣafrā’, الحمى الفحمية fever; tertian l-gibb ḥ.  الحمى القرمزية anthrax; (faḥmīya) l- ḥ. حمى القش fever; scarlet (qirmizīya) foot- (qulā‘īya) الحمى القالعية hayfever; qašš الحمى المخية الشوكية disease; and-mouth cerebrospinal šaukīya) (mukkīya, (mutamawwija) الحمى المتموجة meningitis; brucellosis; fever, Malta fever, undulant fever, puerperal (nifāsīya) الحمى النفاسية (namašīya) الحمى النمشية O fever; childbed fever spotted
حمي ḥummī feverish, febrile, fever- (in compounds)
حمام ḥamām (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. -āt, حمائم ḥamā’im  dove, pigeon │الزاجل حمام carrier pigeon; الحمام ساق bugloss, oxtongue (Anchusa officinalis; bot.)
حمام ḥimām (fate of) death
حمام ḥammām pl. -āt bath; swimming pool; spa, watering place │شمس حمام ḥ. šams sunbath; بحرية حمامات (baḥrīya) seaside resorts
حميم ḥamīm pl. احماء aḥimmā’  close friend; close, intimate; -- hot water
احم aḥamm , f. حماء ḥammā’ , pl. حم
ḥumm black
محم miḥamm hot-water kettle, caldron, boiler
استحمام istiḥmām bathing, bath
محموم maḥmūm feverish, having a fever; frantic, hectic
 حمأ ḥama’a a to clean out, dredge (ھ a well) حمأ ḥama’, حمأة ḥam’a mud, mire, sludge  حمئ ḥami’a to be or become angry, furious,
mad (على at s.o.)
حمحم ḥamḥama (حمحمة ḥamḥama) to neigh, whinny (horse)
حمحمة ḥamḥama neigh(ing), whinnying, whinnies
حمحم ḥimḥim oxtongue, bugloss (Anchusa officinalis; bot.)
حمد ḥamida a (ḥamd) to praise, commend, laud, extol (ه على s.o. for, ھ s.th.) II to praise highly (ه s.o.)
حمد ḥamd commendation, praise, laudation │<I الحمد al-ḥamdu lillāh thank God! praise be to God! praised be the Lord!
حميد ḥamīd praiseworthy, laudable, commendable; benign, harmless (disease)
حمود ḥamūd praiseworthy, laudable, commendable, praised
احمد aḥmad  more laudable, more commendable
al-aḥmadīya aš-šarī‘a الشريعة األحمدية
Mohammedan Law
محمدة maḥmada pl. محامد maḥāmid  commendable act; pl. محامد praises, encomiums
محمود maḥmūd praised; commendable, laudable, praiseworthy
محمد muḥammad praised; commendable, laudable
محمدي muḥammadī pertaining or attributable to Mohammed
حمدل ḥamdala to pronounce the formula <I الحمد
"Praise be to God!”
حمدلة ḥamdala the formula <I الحمد (see above)
حمر II to redden, color or dye red (ھ s.th.); to roast (ھ s.th.); to fry (ھ s.th.); to brown (ھ flour in preparing a roux) IX to turn red, take on a reddish color, redden, blush 204
حمر ḥumar asphalt
حمري ḥumarī asphaltic, asphalt, tar, tarry
حمرة ḥumra redness, red color(ation), red; rouge (cosm.); brick dust, brick rubble; erysipelas, St. Anthony's fire (med.)
حمار ḥimār pl. حمير ḥamīr, حمر ḥumur, احمرة aḥmira donkey, ass │الوحش حمار ḥ. al-waḥš and وحشي حمار (waḥšī) wild ass, onager; الحمار سم samm al-ḥ. oleander (Nerium oleander; bot.)
حمارة ḥimāra pl. حمائر ḥamā’ir  she-ass, female donkey
 حمور ḥumūr red, red color(ation), redness
حميرة ḥumaira redstart (zool.)
حمار ḥammār pl. ة donkey driver
حمر pl. ḥamrā’ , حمراء f. aḥmar , احمر │ pink rosy, ruddy; red-colored, red, ḥumr البحر األحمر infrared; تحت األحمر، دون األحمر Cross; Red the الصليب األحمر Sea; Red the الھوى death; violent (maut) الموت األحمر األحمران intercourse; sexual (hawā) األحمر meat; and wine i.e.) ones”, red two (“the i.e.) red”, the and black (“the االسود واالحمر lipstick احمر الشفاه mankind; all
حمراء ḥamrā’  smut, rust (disease affecting cereals); الحمراء Alhambra, the Citadel of Granada
يحمور yaḥmūr red; deer, roe, roebuck; wild ass; hemoglobin (physiol.)
احمرار iḥmirār reddening, blush(ing), redness, red coloration; erythema (med.)
بطاطس محمرة│ roasted muḥammar محمر
(baṭāṭis) fried potatoes
حمز ḥamaza i (ḥamz) to bite, or burn, the tongue (taste)
حمس ḥamisa a to work with zeal, be zealous, eager, ardent, be or become enthusiastic, get all worked up, get excited, be filled with fanatic enthusiasm V = I; to be overzealous or over-enthusiastic (في in s.th.); to advocate fervently (ل s.th.), throw o.s. wholeheartedly behind s.th. (ل)
حمس ḥamis and احمس aḥmas  unflinching, staunch, steadfast, ardent, eager, zealous, stout, hearty; fiery, enthusiastic, full of enthusiasm
حماس ḥamās, and حماسة ḥamāsa enthusiasm, fire, ardor, fervor, zeal, fanaticism
حماسي ḥamāsī enthusiastic, ardent, fiery, zealous, fanatic; stirring, rousing, thrilling, electrifying
تحمس taḥammus unflinching zeal, enthusiasm (ل for), fanaticism
متحمس mutaḥammis enthusiastic, ardent, fiery, zealous, fanatic; an ardent follower, a fanatic adherent, a fanatic
حمش ḥamaša u to excite, irritate, infuriate, enrage (ه s.o.)
حمشة ḥamša catgut (med.)
 حمص II to roast; to fry, broil (A s.th.)
حمص ḥimmiṣ, ḥimmmaṣ; (colloq.)
ḥummuṣ (coll.; n. un. ة) chick-pea
 حمص Mm,' Homs (the ancient Emesa, city in oentral Syria)
حمض ḥamuḍa u (حموضة ḥumūḍa) to be or become sour II to make sour, sour, acidify, acidulate (ھ s.th.); to develop (ھ a photographic plate, a film; phot.); to cause (ھ s.th.) to oxidize
حمض ḥamaḍa pl. احماض aḥmāḍ acid
(chem.) │بولي حمض (baulī) uric acid حمضي شجر šajar ḥamḍī citrus trees حمضية ḥamḍīya pl. -āt citrus fruit 205
حموضة hummūḍa sourness, acidity │ الحموضة مولد muwallid al-ḥ. oxygen (chem.)
حماض ḥammāḍ, حميض ḥummaiḍ sorrel (bot.)
تحميض taḥmīḍ souring, acidification; development (phot.)
احماض iḥmāḍ jocular language, joking remark
حامض sour, acid; acidulous; (pl. حوامض ḥawāmiḍ) acid (chem.) │الفحم حامض ḥ. al- faḥm carbonic acid: كبريتي حامض (kibrītī) sulphuric acid
حمق ḥamiqa a and ḥamuqa u (ḥumq, حماقة ḥamāqa) to be stupid, silly, foolish, fatuous; to become angry or furious II and IV to regard (ه s.o.) as a fool, consider (ه s.o.) dumb, stupid, idiotic n pretend to be stupid VII to become angry or furious X to consider (ه s.o.) dumb, stupid, idiotic
حمق ḥumq stupidity, silliness, foolishness, folly
حماقة ḥamāqa stupidity, silliness, foolishness, folly; anger, wrath حماق ḥumāq, ḥamāq smallpox, variola (med.)
حمق aḥmaq , f. حمقاء ḥamqā’ , pl. حمق ḥum(u)q, حمقى ḥamqā, حماقى ḥamāqā dumb, stupid, silly, foolish, fatuous; fool, simpleton, imbecile
 حمق ḥamqān dumb, stupid, silly, foolish; angry, furious

حمل ḥamala i (ḥaml) to carry, bear (ھ s.th.); to lift, pick up (ھ s.th. in order to carry it), load up and take along (ھ s.th.): to hold (ھ s.th., in one’s hand); to carry on or with one. take or bring along (ھ s.th.); to transport, carry, convey (ھ s.th.); to bring, take (الى or ھ ل s.th. to s.o.); to take upon
o.s. (عن instead of or for s.o., ھ a burden), carry, assume (ھ the burden, عن of s.o. else), relieve (عن ھ s.o. from s.th.), take ( ھ a burden, a grievance, etc.) from s.o. ( عن); to extend, show, evince, cherish, ha.rbor (ھ a feeling, ل toward s.o.); to become or be pregnant (من by s.o.): to bear fruit (tree); to induce, cause, prompt, get (ه على s.o. to do s.th.), make s.o. (ه) do s.th. (على); to convert, bring around, win over (ه رأيه على s.o. to one’s opinion), convince (ه رأيه على s.o. of one’s opinion); to attack (على s.o.), also على حملة حمل (ḥamlatan) to launch or make an attack on; to know by beart (ھ a book); to relate, refer (ھ على s.th. to). bring (ھ s. th.) to bear (على upon s.th.), link, correlate, bring into relation (ھ s.th., على with); to trace, trace back (ھ على s.th. to); to ascribe, attribute, impute (ھ على s.th. to s.o.); to make (ھ a word) agree grammatically (على with another) │ نفسه في حملto feel  annoyed, be in a melancholy mood, feel blue; نفسه على حمل to pull o.s. together, brace o.s.; محمل على حمله (maḥmali) to take s.th. to mean …, interpret or construe s.th. in the sense of …, as if it were ...; على حمله محمل غير to misinterpret, misconstrue s.th.; الجد محمل حمله (maḥmala l-jidd) to take s.th. seriously, take s.th. at face value II to have or make (ه s.o.) carry or bear (ھ s.th.), load, burden, charge, task (ه ھ، s.o. or s.th. ھ with), impose (ه ھ on s.o. s.th.) V to hear, assume, take upon o.s. (ھ s.th., e.g., النفقات an-nafaqāt the expenses, المسؤولية al- mas’ūlīya the responsibility); to bear up ( ھ under), bear, stand, sustain, endure, tolerate, stomach (ھ s.th.); to undergo, suffer (ھ s.th.); to be able to stand (ه s.o.) or put up (ه with s.o.); to set out, get on one’s way; to depart VI to maltreat, treat unjustly (على s.o.), be prejudiced, be biased, take sides (على against s.o.); to
struggle to 206 one’s feet, rise with great effort │ نفسه على تحامل (nafsihi) to brace o.s.; to pull o.s. together, take heart, pluck up courage VIII to carry, bring (ھ s.th.); to carry away, take away, haul off, lug off (ھ s.th.); to suffer, undergo, bear, stand, endure, sustain (ھ s.th.); to allow, permit, suffer, tolerate, brook, stomach (ھ s.th.), acquiesce (ھ in), put up, bear (ھ with s.th.); to hold (ھ s.th.), have capacity (ھ for); to imply that s.th. (ھ) is possible, permissible, or conceivable; يحتمل yaḥtamilu and (pass.) yuḥtamalu (it is) bearable, tolerable; (it is) conceivable, possible, probable, likely
حمل ḥaml carrying, bearing; inducement, prompting, encouragement (of s.o., على to); delivery; transport, transportation, conveyance; portage, carrying charges; -- (pl. احمال aḥmāl, حمال ḥimāl) foetus; pregnancy │الحمل عدم ‘adam al-ḥ. sterility (of a woman)
حمل ḥiml, ḥaml pl. احمال aḥmāl cargo, load, burden │حي حمل ḥaml ḥayy pay load, commercial load, live load; ميت حمل mayyit) dead load; dead weight (arch.); موازن حمل (muwāzin) counterpoise, counterweight
حمل ḥamal pl. حمالن ḥumlān, احمال aḥmāl lamb; (unconsecrated) Host (Chr.Copt.); Aries, Ram (astron.)
حملة ḥamla pl. ḥamalāt attack (على on); offensive; campaign; military expedition; expeditionary force │تأديبية حملة (ta’dībīya) punitive expedition; mصحافيي حملة (ṣiḥāfīya) press campaign; استكشافية حملة (istikšāfīya) reconnaissance raid (mil.); ميكانيكية حملة motorized detachment (mil.); انتخابية حملة (intikābīya) election campaign
حملي ḥamalī pl. -īya ambulant water vendor
حميل ḥamīl foundling; guarantor, warrantor
على حميلة ḥamīla ‘alā a burden to, completely dependent upon
حمول ḥamūl long-suffering; gentle, mild-tempered
حمال ḥamnāl pl. -ūn, ة porter, carrier
 حمالة ḥimāla work and trade of a porter or carrier
حمالة ḥammāla (carrier) beam, girder, support, base, post, pier, pillar; suspenders
brassiere (ṣadr) حمالة الصدر│
حمولة ḥumūla pl. -āt load capacity, load limit, capacity; tonnage (of a vessel); portage, freightage, transport charges; (pl. حمائل ḥamā’il ) family (Ir.)
أخذ also ḥamala; حمل see maḥmal محمل s.th. take to il-jidd) (m. شيئا على محمل الجد seriously
محمل maḥmil (colloq. maḥmal) pl. محامل maḥāmil  camel-borne litter; mahmal, a richly decorated litter sent by Islamic rulers to Mecca as an emblem of their independence, at the time of the hadj
تحميل taḥmīl burdening; encumbrance; imposition; loading, shipping, shipment
taḥāmil  تحامل pl. taḥmīla تحميلة
suppository (med.)
تحمل taḥammul taking over, assumption (of burdens); bearing, standing, sufferance, endurance; durability; strength,hardiness, sturdiness, solidity (of a material)
تحامل taḥāmul prejudice, bias, partiality; intolerance
احتمال iḥtimāl bearing, standing, suffering, sufferance, toleration; probability, likelihood, potentiality │صعب االحتمال (ṣa‘b) hard to bear, oppressive
حامل ḥāmil pl. حملة ḥamala porter, carrier; bearer (of a note, of a check, etc.; of an order or decoration); holder (of an identification paper, of a diploma, of a 207 certificate); holding device, holder, clamp, fastener, hold, support (tech.); fighter (على against), (pl. حوامل ḥawāmil ) pregnant │البريد حامل courier, األسھم حملة ḥ. al-ashum shareholders; األقالم حملة the publicists, the writers; ﷲ كالم حامل ḥ. kalām allāh one who knows the Koran by heart; حامل تيار (tayyār) carrier current (el.), حاملة موجات (maujāt) carrier waves (el.)
حاملة ḥāmila pl. -āt device for carrying, carrier │ خريطة حاملةmap case; طائرات حاملة ḥ. ṭā’irāt aircraft carrier
محمول maḥmūl carried, borne, bearable, tolerable; load weight, service weight, cargo; tonnage (of a vessel); predicate, attribute (logic), عليه محمول subject (logic)
infantry motorized (mušāh) مشاة محمولة│ troops airborne جنود محمولون جوا (mil.); (mil.)
محمل muḥammal loaded, laden, heavily charged, burdened (ب with), encumbered ( ب by)
محتمل muḥtamal bearable, tolerable; probable, likely
حملق ḥamlaqa (حملقة ḥamlaqa) to stare, gaze (
في or ب at)
حماليا ḥimalāyā Himalaya
  حمو ḥamū (construct state of حم ḥam) and حماة ḥamāh see   حم
  حمو) and حمي (حمى ḥamiya a to be or become hot; to glow (metal); to flare up; to fly into a rage, become furious (على at) │ حمى الوطيسfierce fighting broke out II to make hot, heat (ھ s.th.), to heat to glowing (ھ metal); to fire up (ھ a stove); to kindle, inflame, stir up, excite (ھ s.th.); to bathe (=   حم II) IV to make hot, heat (ھ s.th.)
حمو ḥamw heat │النيل حمو ḥ. an-nīl prickly heat, heat rash, lichen tropicus (eg.)
حمو ḥumūw heat
حمة ḥuma pl. -āt, حمى ḥuman sting, stinger (of insects); prick, spine (of plants)
حمي ḥamīy hot, glowing; heated, exited
حمى ḥummā see   حم
حمية ḥamīya zeal, ardor, fervor; enthusiasm, ardent zeal, fanaticism; violence, vehemence; passion, rage, fury; heat of excitement; temper, temperament
chauvinism (qaumīya)الحمية القومية │
حميا ḥumayyā heat; excitement, agitation; enthusiasm; fire, passion, impetuosity, vehemence; fury, rage; wine
حماوة ḥamāwa heat
محمى maḥman fire chamber, furnace (of a stove, oven, etc.)
 حام ḥāmin hot; heated, violent, fierce (e.g., a battle); glowing, passionate, fiery; burning
  حمى ḥamā i (ḥamy, حماية ḥimāya) to defend, guard (ه ھ، s.o., s.th., من against), protect, shelter, shield (ه ھ، من s.o., s.th. from); to deny (المريض the patient) harmful food (ھ;
= to put him on diet); to forbid (ه ان s.o. to do s.th.) III to defend (من s.o. or s.th., also, of a lawyer in court); to shield, protect, support (عن s.o. or s.th.), take up the cause of (عن), stand up for (عن) VI to keep away (ھ from), shun, avoid (ھ s.th.) VIII to protect o.s. (ھ ه، from s.th., from s.o.), defend o.s., cover o.s. (ب with s.th.), seek protection, seek shelter or refuge (ب with s.o., also من عند؛ from)
حمى ḥiman protection; defense; sanctuary
حمية ḥimya that which is defended; diet 208
حماية ḥimāya pl. -āt protection, patronage, sponsorship, auspices; protectorate (pol.)
محاماة muḥāmāh defense (jur.); legal profession, practicing of law │ المحاماة ھيأة ḥai’at al-m. the bar
احتماء iḥtimā’ seeking cover, seeking protection; cover, shelter, protection
حام ḥāmin pl. حماة ḥumāh protector, defender, guardian; patron │ الحامية الدولة (daula) protecting power (of a protectorate)
حامية ḥāmiya pl. -āt patroness, protectress; garrison (mil.)
محمي maḥmīy protected (ب by); being under a protectorate, having the status of a protectorate │محمية منطقة (minṭaqa) protectorate (country)
محمية maḥmīya pl. -āt protectorate (country; pol.)
محام muḥāmin pl. محاميون muḥāmūn defense counsel, counselor-at-law, lawyer, barrister, attorney (at law), advocate
محامية muḥāmiya woman lawyer
محتم muḥtamin one who seeks protection; protégé; being under a
protectorate, having the status of a protectorate
  حماه حماة، ḥamāh Hama (city in W Syria)
حن ḥanna i (حنين ḥanīn) to long, yearn, hanker (الى for), crave (الى s.th.); -- (حنة ḥanna, حنان ḥanān) to feel tenderness, affection, sympathy (على for s.o.); to sympathize, commiserate (على with), feel compassion ( على for); to pity (على s.o.), have mercy (على on) II to move, touch, fill with tenderness, soften, fill with compassion (قلبه qalbahū s.o.’s heart); to blossom, flower, be in bloom (tree) V to feel sympathy, feel pity, feel compassion (على for s.o.), commiserate (على with s.o.); to be tender, affectionate
حنة ḥanna sympathy; commiseration, compassion, pity; favorable aspect, advantage
حنان ḥanān sympathy, love, affection, tenderness; commiseration, compassion, pity; حنانيك ḥanānaika have pity! have mercy!
حنانة ḥanāna compassion, pity, commiseration
حنين ḥanīn longing, yearning, hankering, nostalgia, craving, desire
حنون ḥanūn affectionate, loving, soft- hearted, tenderhearted, compassionate, merciful; tender, soft, gentle, kind, moving, touching (voice)
حنان ḥannān affectionate, loving, tender; compassionate, sympathetic
تحنان tiḥnān attachment, devotion, loyalty
تحنن taḥannun tenderness, affection, sympathy
حنأ II to dye red (ھ s.th., with henna)
حناء ḥinnā’ henna (a reddish-orange cosmetic gained from leaves and stalks of the henna plant) │الحناء ابو abū l-ḥ. robin (redbreast); الحناء تمر (colloq. tamr el- ḥinna) henna plant (Lawsonia inermis; bot.)
حانبة look up alphabetically
حنبلي ḥanbalī Hanbalitic, of or pertaining to the
madhab of Aḥmad ibn ḥanbal; puritanical,
 strict in religious matters; (pl. حنابلة
ḥanābila) Hanbalite
حنو see حانوت، حانوتي
حنث ḥanita a (ḥint) with يمينه في or بيمينه: to break one’s oath V to practice piety, perform works of devotion; to seek religious purification; to scorn sin, not yield to sin
حنث ḥint pl. احناث aḥnāt perjury; sin 209
حنجرة ḥanjara pl. حناجر ḥanājir  larynx, throat
حنجور ḥunjūr pl. حناجير ḥanājīr   larynx, throat
حنجل ḥanjala to prance (horse); to caper, gambol II taḥanjala to dance, caper, gambol, frisk
حندس ḥindis pl. حنادس ḥanādis  dark night
حندقوق ḥandaqūq (bot.) melilot, (yellow) sweet clover (Melilotus)
حنش ḥanaš pl. احناش aḥnāš snake
حنط II to embalm (ه a corpse); to stuff (ھ a carcass)
حنطة ḥinṭa wheat
حناطةḥināṭa embalming
تحنط taḥannuṭ mummification
محنط muḥannaṭ mummified
الحنطور عربة ‘arabat al-ḥanṭūr, victoria, light carriage. designed for two passengers
حنظل ḥanẓal (coll.; n. un. ة) colocynth (Citrullue colocynthis; bot.)
حنف ḥanafa i to turn or bend sideways
حنيف ḥanīf pl. حنفاء ḥunafā’  true believer, orthodox; one who scorns the false creeds surrounding him and professes the true religion; true (religion)
Islamic) (i.e., True the (din) الدين الحنيف│ (samḥā’) الحنيفة السمحاء also Religion,
حنفي ḥanafī pagan, heathen, idolater (Chr.); Hanafitic (see حنيفة); (pl. -ūn)
Hanafi
حنفية ḥanafīya paganism, heathendom (Chr.); Hanafitic madhab (an orthodox school of theology founded by Abu Hanifah); -- (pl. -āt) faucet, tap; hydrant
الحنيفية al-ḥanīfīya the True (i.e.,
Islamic) Religion
احنف aḥnaf  afflicted with a distortion of the foot
حنق ḥaniqa a (ḥanaq) to be furious, mad, angry; to be annoyed, exasperated, peeved, irritated (على or من at, by), be resentful (على or من of) IV to infuriate, enrage, embitter, exasperate, irritate (ه s.o.)
حنق ḥanaq fury, rage, ire, wrath, anger, exasperation, resentment, rancor
حنق ḥaniq furious, mad, angry; resentful, bitter, embittered, annoyed, exasperated, peeved
حانق ḥāniq furious, mad, angry; resentful, bitter, embittered, annoyed, exasperated, peeved │الحياة على حانق (ḥayāh) weary of life, dispirited, dejected; النساء على حانق (nisā’) misogynist
محنق muḥannaq infuriated, enraged; embittered, bitter, angry, exasperated, resentful
حنك ḥanaka i u, II and IV to sophisticate, make experienced or worldly-wise through severe trials (said of fate, time, age)
حنك ḥanak pl. احناك aḥnāk palate
حنكي ḥanakī palatal
حنك ḥunk, ḥink and حنكة ḥunka worldly experience, worldly wisdom gained through experience, sophistication
محنك muḥannak experienced, worldly wise, sophisticated │مبنك محنك (mubannak) shrewd, smart, sharp
(حنو and حنا (حنى ḥanā u and حنى ḥanā i to bend, curve, twist, turn; to lean, incline ( على or الى toward s.o.); to feel for s.o. ( على), sympathize (على with s.o.), commiserate, pity (على s.o.), feel compassion, feel pity (على for s.o.); to bend, bow, flex, curve, crook (ھ s.th.) IV to bend, bow, tilt, incline (ھ s.th.; e.g., رأسه ra’sahū one’s head); to sympathize ( ٠١٢ على with s.o.), feel compassion, feel pity (على for s.o.), commiserate, pity (على s.o.) VII to bend, curve, twist, turn; to be winding, be tortuous, wind, meander (e.g., a road); to turn, deviate, digress (عن
 from); to bow (ل to s.o.); to lean, incline ( على or فوق; over s.th., الى toward s.o., toward s.th.); to devote o.s. eagerly (على to s.th.); to contain, harbor (على s.th.) │ان ضغن على تنحني ال ضلوعي (ḍulū‘ī, ḍign) I harbor no grudge, I feel no resentment
حنو ḥanw bending, deflection, flexing, flexure, curving, curvature, twisting, turning
حنو ḥinw pl. احناء aḥnā’ bend, bow, turn, twist, curved line, curve, contour; pl. ribs
bosom her in بين احنائھا│
حنو ḥunuw sympathy, compassion, tenderness, affection
حني ḥanīy bending, deflection, flexing, flexure, curving, ourvature, twisting, turning
حنية ḥanya bend, turn, curve
حنية ḥanīya pl. حنايا ḥanāyā arc; camber, curvature │صدره حنايا في in his bosom; في نفسه حنايا in his heart, deep inside him
حناية ḥināya curving, curvature, twisting, turning, bending
below see حانوت
محنى maḥnan pl. محان maḥānin
curvature, bend, flexure, bow, turn, curve
انحناء inḥinā’ bend, deflection, curvature; curve; arc; inclination, tilt; how, curtsy
انحناءة inḥinā’a (n. vic.) bow, curtsy
الحواني al-ḥawānī the longest ribs; (fig.) breast, bosom │حوانيھم بملء bi-mil’i ḥ. (they shouted) at the top of their lungs, with all their might
محنى maḥnīy bowed, inclined (head); bent, curved, crooked
منحن munḥanin bent, curved, crooked, twisted; inclined, bowed
منحنى munḥanan pl. منحنيات munḥanayāt bend, flexure, deflection, curvature; turn, twist, break, angle; curve (of a road, end math.); slope
حانوت ḥānūt pl. حوانيت ḥawānīt  store, shop; wineshop, tavern
حانوتي ḥānūtī pl. -īya (eg.) corpse washer; undertaker, mortician, gravedigger
حواء ḥawwā’  Eve
حوب V to abstain from sin; to lead ش pious life; to refrain, abstain (من from s.th.)
حوبة ḥauba sin, offense, misdeed, outrage
حوباء ḥaubā’  soul
حوت pl. حيتان ḥītān, احوات aḥwāt fish; whale; Pisces, Fishes (astron.) │سليمان حوت ḥ. sulaimān salmon
حوج IV aḥwaja to have need, stand in need, be in went (الى of s.th.), need, require, went ( الى s.th.); to put (ه s.o.) in need of (الى), make necessary (ه الى for s.o. s.th.), require (ه الى of s.o. s.th.), compel, oblige (ه الى s.o. to); to impoverish, reduce to poverty (ه s.o.) │ الى احوجه ما (aḥwajahū) how much he .tends in need of ...! how urgently he needs ...! VIII to have need, stand in need, be in went (الى of; also ل), need, want, require (الى s.th. s.o.)
حوج ḥauj need, want, lack, deficiency, destitution
حاجة ḥāja pl. -āt need (الى or ب of); necessity, requirement, prerequisite; natural, bodily need; pressing need, neediness, poverty, indigence, destitution; object of need or desire; desire, wish, request; necessary article, requisite; matter, concern, business, job, work; thing, object; -- pl. حوائج ḥawā’ij  needs 211 necessities, necessaries; everyday objects, effects, belongings, possessions, stuff; clothes, clothing │ل) الى حاجة في كان) to stand in need, be in want of (s.th.), need, require (s.th.); ل) الى حاجة ال) (ḥājata)
… is not necessary, not required, there is no need of ...; به لي حاجة ال I don’t need it; الحاجة عند if (or when) necessary, if need be, in case of need; حاجة غير في (gairi ḥājatin) unnecessarily; الحاجة به ما the essentials; الحاجة محل maḥall al-ḥ. the essential passage, the gist, the substance, the crux, the interesting part (of an exposition); حاجته سد sadda ḥājatahū to meet s.o.’s needs, provide for s.o.’s needs; حاجته قضى qaḍā ḥājatahū to fulfill s.o.’s wish; الحاجة قضى to relieve nature
 حاجيات ḥājīyyāt everyday commodities, utensils, utilities, necessaries, necessities
احوج in greater need (الى of s.th.); more necessary
احتياج iḥtiyāj want, need, requirement, (pre)requisite, necessity; pl. -āt needs, necessities, necessaries
محاويج maḥāwīj  (pl. of محوج muḥwij) needy, poor, destitute people
محتاج muḥtāj in need, in want (الى of s.th.), requiring (الى s.th.); poor, destitute, indigent
حوجلة ḥaujala pl. حواجل ḥawājil  phial (chem.)
حود) حاد) ḥāda u (ḥaud) to turn aside, turn away (عن from), turn (عن off) II to turn off, take a turning
حودة (ḥauda) turn, turning
حوذ) حاذ) ḥāda u (ḥaud) to urge on, spur on (ھ animals) IV do. X استحوذ istaḥwada to overwhelm, overcome, overpower (على s.o.; esp. emotions), get the better of ( على), gain mastery (على over); to seize (على on), take possession (على of), usurp (على s.th.)
حوذي ḥūdī coachman, cabman, driver
حوذية ḥūdīya coachman’s work or trade
حور) حار) ḥāra u to return (الى to); to recede, decrease, diminish, be reduced (الى to) II to change, alter, amend, transform, reorganize, remodel, modify (ھ or من s.th.); to roll out (ھ dough); to make white, whiten (ھ s.th.); to bleach (ھ a fabric) III to talk, convene, have a conversation (ه with s.o.); to discuss, debate, argue IV (with جوابا jawāban) to answer, reply (with negations only) V to be altered, changed, amended, transformed, reorganized, remodeled, modified VI to carry on & discussion
حور ḥawar white poplar (also pronounced ḥaur); bark-tanned sheepskin, basil; marked contrast between the white of the cornea and the black of the iris
حارة hāra pl. -āt quarter, part, section (of & city); (Tun.) ghetto; lane, alley, side street (with occasional pl. حواري ḥawārī │ السد حارة ḥ. as-sadd blind alley, dead-end street
احوار aḥwār , f. حوراء ḥaurā’ , pl. حور ḥūr having eyes with a marked contrast of white and black, (also, said of the eye:) intensely white and deep-black
حوارة ḥawāra (ḥawarāt) cretaceous rook; chalk
حواري ḥawārī pl. -ūn disciple, apostle (of Jesus Christ); disciple, follower
حوارى ḥawārā cretaceous rock; chalk
حورية ḥūrīya pl. -āt, حور ḥūr houri, virgin of paradise; nymph; (pl. -āt) young locust │الماء حورية water nymph, nixie
حوران ḥaurān  the Hauran, a mountainous plateau in SW Syria and N Jordan 212
محور miḥwar pl. محاور maḥāwir  rolling pin; pivot, core, heart, center; axis; axle, axletree
محار maḥār (coll.; n. un. ة) oysters; shellfish, mussels; mother-of-pearl, nacre
محارة maḥāra (n. un.) oyster; oyster shell, mussel; trowel
تحوير taḥwīr alteration, change, transformation, reorganization, reshuffle, remodeling, modification
حوار ḥiwār talk, conversation, dialogue; argument, dispute; text (of a play); script, scenario (of a motion picture)
محاورة muḥāwara talk, conversation, dialogue; argument, dispute
تحاور taḥāwur discussion
(حوز and حاز (حيز ḥāza u (ḥauz, حيازة ḥiyāza) to possess, own, have (ھ s.th.); to gain, win, get, receive, obtain, achieve, attain (ھ s.th., e.g., success, victory, etc.); to gain pos.	ion. gain control (ھ of s.th.), seize,
monopolize (ھ s.th.); -- ḥāza i (حيز ḥaiz) to drive on, urge on (ھ camels) V taḥawwaza and taḥayyaza to writhe, twist, coil; -- taḥayyaza to stay away, keep away, seclude o.s., isolate o.s. (عن from); to be disposed, incline, tend, lean (الى toward); to join (الى s.o. or s.th.); to side ( الى ل، with), take sides (الى ل، in favor of) VII to isolate o.s., seclude o.s. separate, segregate,· disengage o.s., dissociate o.s., stay away, keep away, retire, withdraw ( عن or من from); to join (الى S.o. or s.th.); to
 unite (الى with); to side (الى or ل with), take sides (الى or J in favor of) VIII to possess, own, have (ھ s.th.); to take possession (ھ of s.th.); to keep, prevent, hinder (ه عن s.o. from)
حوز ḥauz possession, holding, tenure; obtainment, attainment, acquisition; taking possession, occupation, occupancy; (jur.) tenancy; -- (pl. احواز aḥwāz) enclosed area, enclosure; precinct(s), boundary, city limits
حوزي ḥauzī possessor, tenurial
حوزة ḥauza possession, holding, tenure; property; area, territory │حوزه في or في
يده حوزة  fī ḥ. yadihī in his possession; الدفاع مصر حوزة عن the defense of Egyptian territory
حيز ḥayyiz, ḥaiz pl. احياز aḥyāz scope, range, reach, extent, compass, confines, field, domain, realm; sphere │في يدخل ال المعقول حيز (yadkul) it is not within the bounds of reason; المعقول حيز الى برز (to advance to the realm of fact, i.e.) to become a reality; االمكان حيز في fī ḥ. il- imkān within the realm of possibility, quite possible
حيازة ḥiyāza possession, holding, tenure; taking possession, occupation, occupancy; acquisition of title, acquisition of the right of possession; obtainment, attainment, acquisition
تحيز taḥayyuz partiality; prejudice, bias
انحياز inḥiyāz isolation, seclusion, retirement; partiality; prejudice, bias
حائز ḥā’iz possessor, holder, tenant
متحيز mutaḥayyiz partial, prejudiced, biased
منحاز munḥāz secluded, retired, withdrawn, removed (عن from); an outsider, a stranger (عن to)
حوس VIII (eg.) to be in a quandary, waver, hesitate
 حوش) حاش) ḥāša u (ḥauš) to round up, drive into a trap (ھ game); to stop, check, prevent, hinder (ھ s.th.), stand in the way (ھ of); to hold back, stem, stave off (ھ s.th.) II to gather, collect, amass, accumulate, pile up, hoard (ھ s.th.); to
save, put by (ھ money); to find (ھ s.th.) 213
ḥīšān حيشان aḥwāš, احواش p1. ḥauš حوش
enclosure, enclosed area; courtyard
حوش ḥawaš mob, rabble, riffraff
حوشي ḥūšī wild; unusual, odd, queer, strange
الحاش اسبوع usbū‘ al-ḥāš Passion Week
(Chr.)
حاشى = lillāh ḥāša حشو، حاش <I see حاشا، حاشى 
<I
حوص ḥawaṣ squinting of the eye (caused by constant exposure to glaring light)
احوص aḥwaṣ  f. حوصاء ḥauṣā’ , pl.
حوص ḥūṣ having narrow, squinting eyes
حياصة ḥiyāṣa girth
حوصل ḥauṣa, حوصلة ḥauṣala craw (of a bird); bladder; pelican │ المرارية الحوصلة (marārīya) gall bladder, bile (anat.)
حويصل ḥuwaisil blister, bleb, vesicle; water blister
حويصلة ḥuwaisila pl. -āt blister, bleb, vesicle
حوض ḥauḍ pl. احواض aḥwāḍ, حياض ḥiyāḍ basin; water basin; trough, tank, cistern, reservoir, container; basin of a river or sea; pool; (in the Egyptian irrigation system) a patch of land surrounded by dikes, flooded by high water of the Nile; pond; pelvis (anat.); (garden) bed; dock; pl. حياض (ḥiyāḍ) ground, area, domain (to be protected), sanctum │ جاف حوض (jāff) dry dock; حمام حوض ḥammām bathtub; عوام حوض (‘awwām) floating dock; عن ذاد حياضه to assume the defense of s.o., make
o.s. the champion of s.o.; to defend o.s.; الدين حياض حن ذب (dabba) to defend the faith; والحديد الفم احواض coal and iron deposits
O حويضة ḥuwaiḍa renal pelvis (anat.)
حوط) حاط) ḥāṭa u (ḥauṭ, حيطة ḥaiṭa, حياطة ḥiyāṭa) to guard, protect (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), watch (ه ھ، over s.o., over s.th.), have the custody (ه ھ، of); to attend (ھ to), take care (ھ of), look after s.th. (ھ); to surround, encircle, enclose, encompass (ب s.o., s.th.) II to build a wall (ھ around
 s.th.), wall in (ھ s.th.); to encircle, surround (ھ s.th.), close in from all sides ( ھ on s.th.) III to try to outwit, dupe, or outsmart (ه s.o.); to mislead, lead astray, seduce (ه s.o.) IV to surround (ب s.o., s.th., also ه ھ، s.o., s.th., y with); to encompass, enclose, embrace, comprise, contain (ب s.th., also ھ); to ring, encircle (ب s.o., s.th., also ه ھ، s.o., s.th., ب with s.th.), close in from all sides (ب on); to know thoroughly, comprehend, grasp completely, understand fully (ب s.th.), be familiar, be thoroughly acquainted (ب with) │علما به احاط (’ilman) to know s.th. thoroughly, have comprehensive knowledge of s.th.; to take cognizance, take note of s.th.; ب علما اجاطه he informed him of ..., he let him know about ... ; he brought ... to his notice V to guard, protect (.., 6 s.o., s.th.); to take precautions (ھ with regard to), attend (ھ to); to be careful, be cautious, be on one’s guard VIII to be careful, be cautious, watch out, be on one’s guard; to take precautions, make provision (ل for, so as to ensure ... ); to surround (ب s.o., s.th.); to guard, protect, preserve (ب على s.th. from), take care (ب of), attend (ب to), look after (ب), see to it (بأن that)
حيطة ḥīṯa, ḥaṭa, حوطة ḥauṭa cautiousness, caution, provident care, prudence, circumspection │ أخذ حيطته(ḥīṭatahu) to be on one’s guard, take precautions; حيطة بال thoughtlessly, unthinkingly, inadvertently
حياطة ḥiyāṭa guarding, custody, protection, care 214
تحويط taḥwīṭ encirclement
احاطة iḥāṭa encirclement, encompassment; comprehension, grasp, understanding, knowledge, cognizance (ب of s.th.), acquaintance, familiarity (ب with); information, communication
تحوط taḥawwuṭ provision, care, attention, precaution, prudence; pl. -āt precautionary measures, precautions
احتياط iḥtiyāṭ caution, cautiousness, prudence, circumspection, carefulness; provision, care, attention, precaution, prevention; pl. -āt precautionary measures, precautions │المثال سبيل على as a
precaution, out of precaution, to be on the safe side
احتياطي ihṭiyāṭī precautionary; prophylactic; preventive; replacement; spare- (in compounds); reserve- (in compounds); stand-by; reserve funds, capital reserves (fin.); reserve (mil.) │حبس احتياطي (ḥabs) detention pending investigation; احتياطية تدابير precautionary measures, precautions احتياطية قوات (quwāt) reserves (mil.); احتياطي مال capital reserve, reserve fund; الخام الزيت احتياطى (crude-)oil reserves
حائط pl. حيطان ḥīṭān, حياط ḥiyāṭ, حوائط ḥawā’iṭ  wall │المبكى حائط ḥ. al-mabkā Wailing Wall (in Jerusalem); به (ضرب الحائط عرض or) القى alqā (ḍaraba) bihī ‘urḍa l-ḥā’iṭ to make little of s.th., scorn, disdain, despise s.th.; to reject s.th., discard s.th., throw s.th. overboard; to ruin, thwart, foil s.th.
حويط ḥāwiṭ (eg.) clever, smart, shrewd
محيط muḥīṭ surrounding (ب s.th.); comprehensive; familiar, acquainted (ب with); -- (pl. -āt) circumference, periphery; extent, range, scope, compass, reach, domain, area; milieu, environment, surroundings; ocean; pl. محيطات surroundings, environment │ المحيط االطلنطي(aṭlanṭī) the Atlantic Ocean; المحيط الھادئ (ḥādi’) the Pacific Ocean
محاط muluiJ surrounded (ب by)
متحوط mutaḥawwiṭ cautious, prudent, provident, circumspect, careful, watchful
حوف ḥauf edge, rim, brim, brink; border, hem, fringe
حافة ḥāfa pl. -āt, حواف ḥawāfin border, rim, brim, brink, verge; edge; fringe, hem
│حوافيه بين within it, in it, therein
حوق) حاق) ḥāqa u (ḥauq) to surround, enclose, infold, embrace (ب s.o.. s.th.) II = I (على s.o., s.th.)
pronounce to ḥauqala) حوقلة( ḥauqala حوقل   حول (see ال حول وال قوة اال با<I formula: the ḥaul)
  حوقلةḥauqala pl. حواقل ḥawāqil  phial (chem.), Florence flask
 حوك) حاك) ḥāka u (ḥauk, حياك ḥiyāk, حياكة ḥiyāka) to weave (ھ s.th.); to interweave ( ھ s.th.); to knit (ھ s.th.); to braid, plait (ھ s.th.); to contrive, devise, hatch, concoct ( ھ s.th.; e.g., ruses, intrigues, pretexts), think up, fabricate, create (ھ s.th. in one’s imagination)
حياكة ḥiyāka weaving; knitting; braiding, plaiting
حائك ḥā’ik pl. حاكة ḥāka weaver; -- (mor.) an outer garment made of a long piece of white woolen material, covering body and head
(حول and حال (حيل ḥāla u to change, undergo a change, be transformed; to shift, turn, pass, grow (الى into s.th., also ھ), become (الى s.th.); to deviate, depart (عن from, e.g., a commitment), dodge, evade, fail to meet (عن s.th.); to elapse, pass go by (time); -- ( حيلولة ḥailūla) to prevent (دون s.th.); to intervene, interfere, interpose, come (بين between) │عھد عن حال (‘ahd) to withdraw from a contract; ٥١٢ األمر وبين فالن بين حال to make s.th. inaccessible to s.o., impossible for s.o.; to bar or obstruct s.o.’s way to s.th.; to prevent s.o. from s.th., deny s.o. s.th.; اإلشفاق وبين نفسه بين حال (išfāq) to resist compassion, deny o.s. any sympathy II ḥawwala to change (ھ الى or ھ ھ s.th. to s.th. else), transform, transmute, convert, turn, make (ھ الى or ھ ھ s.th. into s.th. else); to transplant (s.th.); to transfer (ھ s.th.); to convert (ھ s.th., mathematically); to switch commutate (ھ current; el.); to convert, transform (ھ current; el.); to shunt (ھ a railroad car); to switch (ھ a railroad track); to remit, send, transmit (ھ s.th., e.g., money by mail, الى to s.o.); to pass on, hand on (ھ الى s.th. to s.o.); to forward (ھ الى s.th. to s.o. or to an address); to endorse (ھ a bill of exchange, a promissory note); to direct, turn (ھ s.th., also نظرة naẓratan a glance, الى to or toward); to divert, distract, keep (ھ عن or ه
s.o. or s.th. from); to turn away, avert (
عن بصره baṣarahū one's eyes from); to turn off, switch off, disconnect (ھ current; el.) │الدفة حول (daffa) to turn the helm, change the course III (ḥāwala to try, attempt, endeavor (ھ s.th., ان to do s.th.), make an attempt, make an effort (ان to do s.th.); to seek to gain (ھ s.th.) by artful
means; to deceive by pretenses, make excuses, hedge, dodge IV to change ھ ھ or ھ الى s.th. to), transform, transmute, turn, make (ھ ھ or ھ الى s.th. into); to convert, translate (ھ ھ or ھ الى s.th. into); to transfer (ھ s.th.); to remit, send (ھ s.th. الى or على to s.o.); to assign (ه ھ، s.o., s.th., الى or على to s.o.); to turn over, hand over, pass on (ھ على or ه s.o. or s.th. to); to forward (ھ على s.th. to); to refer (ه الى s.o. to); to cede, transfer (ھ a debt, على to s.o.; jur.) │المعاش (الى) على احيل (uḥīla, ma‘āš) and التقاعد الى احيل (taqā‘ud) he was pensioned off; البروتستو الى الكمبيالة احيلت the bill was protested (fin.) V taḥawwala to change, undergo a change; to be changed ( الى to), be transformed, be transmuted, be converted (الى into), become (الى s.th.), turn, grow (الى into), transform (الى --من or عن from -- into), change, develop, evolve ( الى -- من from to); to withdraw, go away, leave; to move (الى to a residence); to turn away (من from), turn one’s back (عن on); to deviate (عن from); to depart, digress, stray (الطريق عن from the way); to renounce, forgo, relinquish, disclaim (s.th.); to proceed slyly or cunningly │ حيلة كل تحول to employ every conceivable trick; -- taḥayyala to employ artful means; to ponder ways and means (ل to an end, in order to attain s.th.) VI taḥāwala to try, endeavor, take pains (على to do s.th.), strive (على for); -- taḥāyala and VIII to employ artful means, resort to tricks, use stratagems (على against s.o.); to deceive, beguile, dupe, cheat, outwit, outsmart (على s.o.); to be out (على for s.th.) or achieve ( على s.th.) by artful means, by tricks VIII to work or strive (on one’s own resources), make efforts (on one’s own) IX احول aḥwala to be cross-eyed, to squint X to change (الى to, into), turn, be transformed, be converted (الى into); to be transubstantiated (bread and wine, الى into the body and blood of Christ; Chr.); to proceed, pass on, shift, switch (الى to s.th. new or s.th. different); to be impossible ( على for s.o.); to be inconceivable, absurd, preposterous
حال ḥāl m. and f., pl. احوال aḥwāl condition, state; situation; position, status; circumstance; case; present, actuality (as opposed to future); circumstantial
 expression or phrase (gram.); pl.: conditions, circumstances; matters, affairs, concerns; cases; ḥāla (prep.) during; immediately upon, right after; just at; in case of …, in the event of …; ٦١٢ حاال ḥālan presently, immediately, at once, right away, without delay; now, actually, at present │الحال في and للحال on the spot, at once, immediately; حال كل على (kulli ḥālin) and حال أي على (ayyi ḥ.) in any case, at any rate, anyhow; حاله على يبقى (yabqā) it remains unchanged, just as it is; من حال في األحوال in some case or other, anyway, if occasion should arise, possibly; (with neg.) by no means, under no circumstances, not at all, in no way; على حال بأي بحال، حال، bi-ayyi ḥ. with neg.: by no means, not at all, in no way; الحال كذلك في the same goes for ..., it is the same with
كما ھو الحال في ...; with case the also is it …; you? are how كيف حالك with; case the is as separate, a itself, in thing a شيء بحاله (jawwīya) األحوال الجوية thing; independent محاكم األحوال conditions; atmospheric vital with dealing courts (šakṣīya) الشخصية قانون or) األحوال الشخصية )نظام statistics; referent noun صاحب الحال statute; personal عرض (gram.); phrase circumstantial a of petition; memorial, application, ḥ. ‘arḍ حال لسان see لسان الحال, لسان حاله
حالما ḥālama (conj.) as soon as
حالة ḥala pl. -āt condition, state; situation; (possible, actual) case; ḥālata (prep.) during │ان حالة ḥālata an (conj.) whereas; ھذه والحالة under these circumstances, such being the case, things being as they are; حالة في (ḥālati) in (the) case of ..., in the event of …, e.g., حالة في غيابه (giyābihī) in case of his absence, في الوفاة حالة (wafāh) in case of death; ھذه في الحالة in this (that) case; ان لحالة li-ḥālati an in case that …, in the event that …; حالة في اذا ما if; في الحالة ھي كما if as is the case with
…; اجتماعية حالة (ijtimā‘īya) marital status; الجوية الحالة (jawwīya) atmospheric conditions; الخطر حالة ḥ. al-kaṭar stand-by, alert, state of alarm; الراھنة الحالة the status quo; الطوارئ حالة ḥ. aṭ-ṭawāri’ state of emergency; التلبس حالة في (talabbus) flagrante delicto (jur.); المدنية الحالة (madanīya) civil status, legal status; سوء الحالة sū’ al-ḥ. predicament, plight
حالي ḥālī present, current, actual, existing; momentary, instantaneous; حاليا ḥālīyan at present, actually │حالية صورة (ṣūra) snapshot (phot.)
حالية ḥālīya actuality, topicality, timeliness
حول ḥaul pl. احوال aḥwāl year; might, power │<Iبا اال قوة وال حول ال lā ḥaula wa-lā quwata illā bi-llāh there is no power and no strength save in God; حيلة وال له حول ال (wa-lā ḥīlata) he is completely powerless, he can do nothing, he is at the end of his resources
حول ḥiwal change of place, change │ال حوال عنه يبتغون (yabtagūna) they don’t want it otherwise, they ask for it
حول ḥaula (prep.) around, about; circa, about, some, approximately, roughly (with following number); about (esp. in news headings, approx. = re, concerning) │ من حوله (ḥaulihī) (= حوله) around him (or it), about him (or it); حوليھما من (ḥaulaihimā) around the two of them, about them; from their vicinity, from their surroundings (dual)
حولي ḥaulī periodic, temporary, interim; one year old (animal), yearling; young animal; lamb, wether
O حوليات ḥaulīyāt yearbook, annals (= Fr. annales, as a scientific publication)
حيل ḥail strength, force, power, vigor │ حيله على(standing) upright, erect; وال له قوة ال حيل (qūwata) completely helpless and paralyzed
حيلة ḥīla pl. حيل ḥiyal, احاييل aḥāyīl  artifice, ruse, stratagem, maneuver, subterfuge, wile, trick; device, shift; a 217 means to accomplish an end; expedient, makeshift, dodge, way-out; legal stratagem (for the purpose of in fraudem legis agere) │ما الحيلة what’s to be done! في له حيلة ال (ḥīlata) I have no possibility to …, I am in no position to …; حيلة بيدي ما (bi-yadī) I can do nothing, I can get nowhere; اال حيلة يجد لم lam yajid ḥīlatan illā he couldn’t do anything except …, he had no other choice than …; الحيلة اعيته (a‘yathu) he was at a loss, he was at the end of his wits
 حيلي ḥiyalī cunning, crafty, wily, sly, tricky, foxy
احيل aḥyal  craftier, wilier
حول ḥawal squinting, strabismus
احول aḥwal , f. ḥaula’  ḥaulā , pl. حول ḥūl squinting, squint-eyed, wall-eyed, walleyed
حؤول ḥu’ūl change, transformation, transmutation; prevention (دون of s.th.)
حوال ḥiwāl obstacle; partition, screen
حيال ḥiyāla (prep.) in view of ..., with regard to …, in the lace of, opposite, in front of, before
حوالة ḥawāla pl. -āt assignment, cession (jur.); bill of exchange, (promissory) note, check, draft │بريدية حوالة ,البريد حوالة money order; السفر حوالة ḥ. safar traveler’s check
حوالى ḥawālā (prep.) around, about; circa, approximately, roughly, about, some (with following number)
حيلولة ḥailūla separation, interruption, disruption; prevention (دون of s.th.)
below) (see ال محالة = maḥalla lā ال محال
محالة muḥāla roller, wheel (of a draw well)
منه محالة ال lā maḥālata minhu it is inevitable; there is no doubt about it; (also محالة ال alone) most certainly, positively, absolutely, by all means
تحويل taḥwīl transformation, transmutation, conversion (الى into s.th.); change, alteration, modification; transplantation; transposition, reversal, inversion, translocation, dislocation, displacement; transfer, assignment; conversion (e.g., of currency); conversion, transformation (of electric current); O transfer (fin.; also الدين تحويل t. ad-dain); remittance (of money), transmittal, sending, forwarding; bill of exchange, promissory note, draft (com.); check; endorsement (com.); c.o.d., cash on delivery │االجنبية العمالت الى للتحويل العملة قابلية (qābilīyal al-’mla, ajnabīiya) convertibility of currency
تحويلة taḥwīla pl. تحاويل taḥāwīl  branch, offshoot; siding, sidetrack (railroad); side canal (irrigation; Eg.); switch (railroad)
محاولة muḥāwala pl. -āt attempt, try; effort, endeavor;. recourse to expedients, shifts, or dodges, dodging, hedging │ حياته على محاولة(ḥayātihī) attempt on s.o.’s life, murderous assault
احالة iḥāla transfer, conveyance, assignment; remittance; forwarding, referring (الى or على to a competent authority); transmission, transmittal; O transfer (fin.); cession, assignment (Isl. Law); absurdity │ على باالحالة with reference to; االحالة قاضي magistrate sitting at defendant’s arraignment, trial judge; المعاش (على) الى احالة (ma‘āš) and الى احالة التقاعد (taqā‘ud) pensioning off
تحول taḥawwul change, transformation, transmutation; abrupt change, sudden turn, reversal; shift, transition; departure, deviation, digression (عن from); renunciation (<< of) │التحول نقطة nuqṭat
at-t. turning point
تحيل taḥayyul use of tricks, trickery 218
تحايل taḥāyul and احتيال iḥtiyāl use of tricks, trickery; cunning, craft, subtlety, artfulness; malice, treachery, perfidy; deception, fraud
تحايلي taḥāyulī and احتيالي iḥtiyālī fraudulent, e.g., احتيالي افالس (iflās) fraudulent bankruptcy
استحالة istiḥāla change, transformation, transmutation, turn, shift, transition; transubstantiation (Chr.); impossibility, inconceivability, absurdity, preposterousness
حائل ḥā’il pl. حوائل ḥawā’il obstacle, obstruction, impediment (دون on the way to s.th., و -- بين see حال ḥāla I); barrier; partition, screen, folding screen; -- (pl. حول ḥuwwal) changeable, variable, frequently changing; feeble, languid, wan, pallid
محول muḥawwil pl. -āt converter, transformer (el.); endorser
محولة muḥawwila switch (railroad)
عليه محول muḥawwal ‘alaihi c.o.d., cash on delivery; به محول collected on delivery
 محيل muḥīl transferor, assignor (Isl.
Law)
محال muḥāl inconceivable, unthinkable, impossible, absurd, preposterous, unattainable
متحول mutaḥawwil changeable, variable, changing │ المتحولة األعياد(a‘yād) the movable feasts (Chr.)
محتال muḥtāl artful, cunning, deceitful, treacherous, perfidious, fraudulent; swindler, cheat, impostor, fraud; crook, scoundrel; assignee (Isl. Law) │ عليه محتال debtor of a ceded claim, transferee (Isl.
Law)
مستحيل mustaḥīl impossible, absurd, preposterous; مستحيالت impossible things, impossibilities, absurdities
(حام (حوم ḥāma u (ḥaum, حوم ḥawamān) to circle, hover. glide (in the air; of a bird, also of an aircraft); to hover, swarm, buzz (حول and على around) │ ضده الشبھة حامت (šubha, ḍiddahū) suspicion concentrated on him, he was suspected II to circle in the air; to hover in circles, to circle; to go around, revolve (thoughts and images, in one’s head or mind); to browse (في in a book)
حومة ḥauma pl. -āt turmoil of battle, thick of the fray; main part, bulk, main body; (tun.) quarter, section (of a city)
حين see حانة and حان حنو see حانوت
حوى ḥawā i to gather, collect, unite (ھ s.th.); to encompass, embrace, contain, hold, enclose, comprise, include (ھ s.th.); to possess, own, have (ھ s.th.); to clasp (ھ s.th., the hand) V to curl (up), coil (up) VIII to encompass, embrace, contain, hold, enclose, comprise, include (ھ or على s.th.); to possess, own, have (ھ or على s.th.)
حوية ḥawīya convolution, coil, curl, roll; pl. حوايا ḥawāyā intestine, bowels, entrails
حواية ḥiwāya pl. -āt (eg.) wase round pad to support a burden on the head or on the back
حاو ḥāwin pl. حواة ḥuwāh snake charmer; juggler, conjurer, magician
محتويات muḥtawayāt content(s) (of a book. of a receptacle) │النفوس محتويات the innermost thoughts. the secrets of the heart
(حيي (حيو حى، ḥayiya, حي ḥayya يحيا yaḥyā (حياة ḥayāh) to live; حي ḥayya to live to see, experience, witness (ھ s.th.), live (ھ through a time) الملك ليحي li-yaḥyā 219 l- malik long live the king! حيي ḥayiya يحيا yaḥyā (حياء ḥayā’) to be ashamed (من of; because of) II حيا ḥayyā to keep (ه s.o.) alive, grant (ه s.o.) a long life; to say to
s.o. (ﷲ حياك :(ه may God preserve your life!; to greet, salute (ه s.o.) IV احيا aḥyā to lend life (ه ھ، to s.o., to s.th.), enliven, animate, vitalize, endow with life, call into being (ھ s.th.), give birth (ھ to); to revive, reanimate, revivify (ھ s.th.), give new life (ھ to); to put on, produce, stage, arrange (ھ e.g., a theatrical performance, a celebration, and the like); to celebrate (ھ s.th., also a festival) │الذكرى احيا (dikrā) to commemorate (a deceased person), observe the anniversary (of s.o.’s death); الليل احيا (lail) to burn the midnight oil, احيا صالة الليل (ṣalātan) to spend the night in prayer; السھرة احيا (sahrata) to perform in the evening (of an artist); حفلة احيا (ḥaflatan) to give a performance; to perform at a celebration (artist); احيت قد
ليال ثالث الفرقة qad aḥyat il-firqatu talāta layālin the theatrical troupe gave three evening performances X استحيا istaḥyā to spare s.o.’s (ه) life, let live, keep alive (ه s.o.); استحيا istaḥyā, استحى istaḥā to be ashamed (ه to face s.o.; من of s.th., because of s.th.); to become or feel embarrassed ( من in front of s.o.), be embarrassed (من by); to be bashful, shy, diffident
حي ḥayy pl. احياء aḥyā’ living, live, alive; lively, lusty, animated, active, energetic, unbroken, undaunted, undismayed; living being, organism; tribe, tribal community; block of apartment houses; section, quarter (of a city) │علم األحياء ‘ilm al-aḥyā’ biology; العالم حي ‘ilm al-‘ālam houseleek tree (Sempervivum arboreum L.; bot.)
حي ḥayya: الصالة على حي ḥayya ‘alā ṣ- ṣalāh come to prayer!
 حية ḥayya pl. -āt snake, serpent, viper
O احيائي aḥyā’ī biologic(al); (pl. -ūn) biologist │احيائية كيمياء (kīmiyā’) bio- chemistry
حيي ḥayīy bashful, shy, diffident, modest
حياء ḥayā’ shame, diffidence, bashfulness, timidity; shyness │الحياء قليل shameless impudent; الحياء قلة qillat al-ḥ. shamelessness, impudence
حياة ḥayāh pl. حيوات ḥayawāt life; life- blood; liveliness animation │الريف حياة ḥ. ar-rīf country life, rural life; العامة الحياة (‘āmma) public life; العائلية الحياة family life; الحياة ميتوى mustawā l-ḥ. living standard; O الحياة علم ‘ilm al-ḥ. biology
حيوي ḥayawī lively, full of life, vital, vigorous; vital, essential to life
حيوية ḥayawīya vitality, vigor, vim
مواد مضادة للحيويات ḥayawīyāt: حيويات
(mawādd muḍādda) antibiotics
حيوان ḥayawān pl. -āt animal, beast; (coll.) animals, living creatures │حيوانات ثدية (tadyīya) mammals; مجترة حيوانات (mujtarra) ruminants; طفيلي حيوان (ṭufailī) parasite; الحيوان علم ‘ilm al-ḥ. zoology
حيواني ḥayawānī animal (adj.); zoologic(al)
حيوانية ḥayawānīya bestiality; animality, animal nature
حوين ḥuwayyin pl. -āt minute animal, animalcule
احيى aḥyā livelier; more vigorous, more vital
تحية taḥīya pl. –āt, تحايا taḥāyā greeting, salutation; salute; cheer (= wish that God may give s.o. long life) │لذكراه تحية taḥīyatan li-dikrāhu in order to keep his memory alive, in remembrance of him; العسكرية التحية (‘askarīya) military salute
احياء iḥyā’ animation, enlivening; revival, revitalization, revivification; arranging, staging. conducting, putting on, 220 holding (of a celebration) │الذكرى احياء i. ad-dikrā commemoration (of a deceased person); لذكرى احياء I (iḥyā’an) (with foll. gen.) in commemoration of …, in
al-mawāt i. احياء الموات ...; memoriam
cultivation of virgin land
استحياء istiḥyā’ shame; diffidence, bashfulness, timidity; shyness
محيا mūḥayyan face, countenance
al-mustahīya as-sitt الست المستحية
sensitive plant (Mimosa pudica; bot.)
 حيث ḥaitu (conj.) where (place and direction); wherever; since, as, due to the fact that; whereas; inasmuch as │ان حيث (anna) since, as, because, due to the fact that ... ; in that ... ; كان حيث wherever it be; in any case, at any rate; حيث الى ilā ḥaitu where (direction); to where …, to the place where ...; حيث من min ḥaitu from where, whence, wherefrom; where (place); whereas; (with foll. nominative) as to, as for, concerning, regarding, with respect to, in view of, because of; الثقافة حيث من min ḥ. taqāfatu with regard to education, as far as education is concerned; وال يدري حيث من يدري (yadrī wa-lā yadrī) whether he knows it or not, knowingly or without his knowledge;	حيثال من (with foll. perf.) without (being, doing, etc.); ھو حيث من such, in itself, ھو حيث من العالم (‘ālam) the world in itself, the world as such; حيث من ان (anna) inasmuch as; in view of the fact that; since, as, due to the fact that; بحيث bi- ḥaitu inasmuch as; in such a manner
that ..., so as to ...; so that ...; such as ...; (he found himself) at a point or degree where, e.g., ترى ال بحيث البراءة من كان (barā’a, tarā) = she was so naive that she couldn't see ...; ال بحيث insofar as ... not, provided that … not; ان بحيث (anna) in such a manner that ..., so as to ..., so
that ...
حيثما ḥatumā wherever, wheresoever (place); wherever, no matter where ... (direction) │اتفق حيثما (ittafaqa) anywhere, wherever it was (or he), haphazardly, at random
حيثية ḥaitīya pl. -āt standpoint; view, point, point of view, approach; aspect, respect, regard, consideration; high social standing, social distinction, dignity; pl. also: considerations, legal reasons on which the judgment is based, opinion (jur.) │البارزة) الحيثية ذوو) (dawū) or اصحاب الحيثيات اصحاب الحيثية، people of (high)
 social standing, prominent people, people of distinction; الحيوانية الحيثية من (ḥayawānīya) from a zoological viewpoint
 الحيثيون al-hātīyūn the Hittites
(حاد (حيد ḥāda i (ḥaid, حيود ḥuyūd, حيدان ḥayadān, محيد maḥīd) to deviate, swerve, depart, desist (If from); to leave, quit, give up, abandon, relinquish (عن s.th.); عن به حاد to dissuade or get s.o. away from ... ; to incline, tend (نحو الى، to, toward), sbade, blend (نحو الى، into) II to keep aside, put aside (ھ s.th.) III to stay away, keep apart (ه ھ، from s.o., from s.th.); to avoid, shun ( ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) VII to depart, deviate, digress, swerve (عن from)
حيد ḥaid, حيدان ḥayadān deviation, digression, departure, swerving, turning aside, turning away
حيدة ḥaida deviation, digression, swerving, departure (from a course); neutrality; impartiality │حيدة على aside, apart, to one side
محيد maḥīd avoidance (عن of s.th.) │ال محيد (maḥīda) it is unavoidable
حايد ḥiyād neutrality (pol.) │الحياد على neutral; الخط عن حياد (kaṭṭ) derailment (railroad) 221
حيادي ḥiyādī neutral (pol.)
محايدة muḥāyada neutrality (pol.)
حائد ḥā’id neutral (pol.)
المحايدون (pol.); neutral muḥāyid محايد
the neutrals (pol.)
متحايد mutaḥāyid neutral (pol.)
حيدراباد ḥaidarābād  Hydarabad
حير) حار) ḥāra (1  pers. perf. حرت) a (حيرة ḥaira, حيران ḥayarān) to become confused; to become or be helpless, be at a loss, know nothing (في of, about); to waver, hesitate, be unable to choose (وبين -- بين between - and) │امره في حار (amrihi) to be confused. baffled, bewildered, dismayed to be at a loss, be at one’s wit’s end II to confuse, baffle, bewilder, nonplus, embarrass (ه s.o.) V to become confused; to be or become dismayed, startled, baffled, perplexed (في by), be at a loss (في to); to waver (uncertainly) (بين between) │ امره في تحير (amrihi) to be confused,
baffled, bewildered, disconcerted, be at a loss, be at one’s wit’s end VIII = V
حير ḥair fenced-in garden, enclosure │ الحيوان حير ḥ. al-ḥayawān zoological garden, zoo
حيرة ḥaira confusion, perplexity, bewilderment, embarrassment, helplessness حيرة في embarrassed, at a loss, helpless
حيران ḥairān , f. حيرى ḥairā, pl. حيارى ḥayārā, ḥuyārā confused, perplexed, startled, dismayed, disconcerted, baffled, Nonplused, bewildered, appalled, taken aback, stunned; embarrassed, at a loss, at one’s wit’s end; uncertain, helpless, sheepish (smile, etc.), confused, incoherent (words, and the like)
تحير taḥayyur confusion, perplexity, bewilderment, dismay; embarrassment, helplessness
حائر ḥā’ir disconcerted, perplexed, startled. dismayed; embarrassed, helpless, at a lost, at one’s wit’s end; baffled, bewildered, confused, uncertain (في about); straying, astray │امره في حائر (amrihī) confused, baffled, bewildered, embarrassed, at a loss, helpless
محير muḥayyar embarrassed, at a loss, helpless
حائر = muḥtār محتار and muḥayyir محير حوز see حيز
حزب see حيزبون
حيص) حاص) ḥāṣa i (ḥaiṣ, حيصة ḥaiṣa, محيص maḥīṣ) to flee, escape (عن s.th. or from s.th.), run away (عن from), turn one’s back (عن on) VII do.
حيص ḥaiṣ, حيصة ḥaiṣa flight, escape
baiṣa ḥaiṣa fī waqa‘a وقع في حيص بيص
to get into a bad fix, meet with difficulties
حوص see حياصة
محيص maḥīṣ flight, escape; place of refuge, retreat, sanctuary │محيص عنه ما it is unavoidable; محيص من لھم يكن لم they couldn’t but ..., they had no other alternative but to ...
 (حاضت (حيض ḥāḍat i (ḥaiḍ, محيض maḥīḍ, محاض maḥāḍ) and V to menstruate, have a monthly period
ḥiyāḍ حياض and )حيضة un. (n. ḥaiḍ حيض
menstruation, monthly period
حائض ḥā’iḍ (f.) and حائضة menstruating
حوط  see حيطة، حياطة، حيطان،  حياط
 حيف) حاف) ḥāfa i (ḥaif) to deal unjustly (على with s.o.), wrong, injure, harm (على s.o.); to restrict, limit, curtail, impair (على s.th.), encroach (على upon) V to 222 impair, injure, prejudice, violate (ھ or من s.th.), encroach, infringe (ھ or من upon)
حيف ḥaif wrong, injustice; harm, damage, prejudice │ عليه حيفwhat a pity! too bad! به حيف ال (ḥaifa) it is not out of place, it is quite appropriate
  حيفاء ḥaifā’ Haifa (seaport in NW Israel)
حيق) حاق) ḥāqa i to surround, beset from all sides (ب s.o.); to fall, descend, come (ب upon s.o., punishment), befall, overtake, grip, seize, overcome (ب s.o.), happen, occur (ب to); to penetrate, pierce (في the body; of a sword); to affect, influence (في s.o., s.th.) IV to surround, beset from all sides (ب s.o.); to bring down (ب ھ upon
s.o. s.th.), cause s.th. (ھ) to descend (ب ھ
upon s.o.)
حيق ḥaiq consequence, effect (of a misdeed redounding upon the evildoer)
حيك II to weave
حوك see حياكة
حوك see حائك = ḥaik حيك
حول; see etc., ,حيلة, احيل, حيال, حيلولة V, حيل   حلو see احيلي
  حايلḥāyil  Hail (town and oasis in N Nejd)
حين) حان) ḥāna i to draw near, approach, come, arrive (time); to happen accidentally │حان الوقت the (right) time has come; now is the time; الوقت له حان the time has come for him to …; يفھموا ان لھم حان اما (amā, an yafhamū) haven’t they understood yet ...?; التفاتة مني حانت (minnī iltifāta) I happened to turn around (الى to), it just happened that my eyes fell on (الى) II to set a time (ه for s.o.) IV to destroy, wipe out (ه s.o.) V to watch, wait (ھ fur a time or an
opportunity) │الفرصة تحين (furṣata) to wait for an opportunity, bide one's time X استحين istaḥyana to wait for the right time
حان ḥān bar; cabaret
حانة ḥāna pl. -āt bar, wineshop, wine tavern; pub, tavern, taproom
حين ḥain death, destruction
حين ḥīn pl. احيان aḥyān, احايين aḥāyīn  time; propitious time, good time, opportunity; ḥīna (prep.) at the time of ..., at, upon; (conj.) at the time when, when; as soon as; حينا ḥīnan for some time; once, one day; احيانا aḥyānan occasionally, from time to time, sometimes │حينا -- حينا sometimes -- sometimes, at times -- at times; االحايين في at times, sometimes, once in a while; األحايين) األحيان بعض في) fī ba‘ḍi l-a. and األحيان بعض ba‘ḍa l-a. sometimes, occasionally, now and then, once in a while, from time to time, at times; اغلب في األحيان fī aglabi l-a. mostly, most of the time, in most cases; حين الى for some time; meanwhile, for the time being; حينه في then, at the time, in his (its) time; in due time, at the appointed time; الحين ذا dā l- ḥīna just now, right now; الحين ذلك من from that time on, from then on; الحين ذلك الى until that time, till then; حين في (with foll. verb) whereas; ان حين في and ان حين على (ḥīni) at the same time when ..., while; whereas, also without ان, e.g., ھم حين على يزعمون ‘alā ḥīni hum yaz‘umūna whereas they, on the other hand, claim; الى حين من آلخر حين من حين، بعد حينا وحين، حين بين حين، (li-ākara) and وآلخر حين بين (wa-ākara)
from time to time, now and then, once in a while
حينئذ ḥīna’idin at that time, then, that day
حينذاك ḥīnadāka at that time, then, that day
حينما ḥīnamā (conj.) while; when, as
حي ٣٢٢ see حيوية and حيوان، حيوي
خ
خاء ḳā’ name of the letter خ
خاتون ḳātūn pl. خواتين ḳawātīn  lady, socially prominent woman│الخاتون زھرة zahrat al- ḳ. little blue flower of the steppe (syr.)
 rabbi )حاخام(= ḳāḳām خاخام
zinc (eg.) ḳāriṣīnī خارصينى and ḳāriṣīn خارصين
خازوق ḳāzūq pl. خوازيق ḳawāzīq  post, stake, pole; dirty trick│ خازوق ھذا that’s tough luck!
خاقان ḳāqān pl. خواقين ḳawāqīn  overlord, ruler, sovereign, monarch, emperor
خاكى ḳākī earth-colored, khaki
خول see خؤول، خؤولة
خام ḳām raw, unworked, unprocessed; untanned; linen; calico; (pl. -āt) raw material; inexperienced, green, untrained, unskilled, artless, uncouth, boorish; pl. خامات raw materials│خام جلود raw leather; خام خيوط raw fibers; خام زيت (zait) crude oil; خام سكر (sukkar) raw sugar; الخام المواد (mawādd) the raw materials
خان ḳān pl. -āt hostel, caravansary; inn, pub, tavern│الخليلى الخان (ḳalīlī) district of Cairo (center of art trade and market activity); يونس خان Khan Yunis (town in Gaza sector)
خانة pl. -at column (e.g., of a newspaper); square (e.g., on a chessboard)
خب ḳabba u (ḳabb, خبب ḳabab, خبيب ḳabīb) to amble (animal); to trot (horse); to jog, saunter (person), to sink (فى in sand); -- u (ḳabb) to surge, heave, be rough (sea) V and VIII to amble (animal); to trot (horse)
خبب ḳabab amble; trot
خب ḳabb, ḳibb heaving, surging (of the sea, rough sea
خب ḳabb impostor. swindler
خب ḳaba’a a and II to bide, conceal (ھ s.th) V to hide, conceal o.s.; to be hidden, be concealed VIII to hide, conceal o.s.; to disappear; to be hidden, be concealed
خبء ḳib’ that which is hidden, a hidden thing
خبيئة ḳabī’a pl. خبايا ḳabāyā that which is hidden; a hidden, secret thing; a cache│ االرض خبايا ḳ. l-arḍ that which is hidden in the earth; natural resources
مخبأ maḳba’ pl. مخابئ maḳābi’  hiding place; hide-out, refuge, haunt, retreat; cellar, shelter, air-raid shelter
خباء ḳibā’ pl. اخبئة aḳbi’a, اخبية aḳbiya tent; husk, hull (of grain)
خواب ḳawābī’ , خوابئ pl. ḳāiya خابية ḳābi’a, خابئة
ḳawābin large vessel, cask, jar
مخبآت muḳabba’āt hidden, secret things; secrets
مختبئ muḳtabi’ hidden, concealed
خبت IV to be humble (الى before God(
خبث ḳabuta u (ḳubt, خباثة) to be bad; to be wicked, evil, malicious, vicious, malignant VI to behave viciously, display malice; to feel awkward, feel embarrassed
خبث ḳubt badness, wickedness; malignancy (e.g., of a disease); malice, malevolence, viciousness
خبث ḳabat refuse, scum, dross, slag
خبيث ḳabīt pl. خبث ḳubut, خبثاء ḳubatā’ , اخباث aḳbāt, خبثة ḳabata bad, evil, wicked; malicious, vicious, spiteful; noxious, injurious, harmful; malignant (disease); offensive, repulsive, nauseating, disgusting (odor)
اخبث aḳbat worse; more wicked
خباثة ḳabāta badness wickedness; malice, malevolence, viciousness, malignancy
خبر ḳabara u (ḳubr, خبرة ḳibra) to try, test (ھ s.th.); to experience (ھ s.th.); to have tried, have experienced, know by experience (ھ s.th.); to get to know thoroughly, know well (ھ s.th., ه s.o.); ḳabura u to know thoroughly (ب or ھ s.th.), be fully acquainted (ب or ھ with s.th.) II to notify, advise, apprise, inform, tell (ه s.o., ب of or about) III to write (ه to s.o.). address (ه s.o.), turn, appeal (ه to s.o.), contact (ه s.o.) in writing; to negotiate, treat, parley (ه with s.o.) IV to notify, inform, apprise, advise (ه ب s.o. of), let know, tell (ه ب s.o. about); to communicate, report, relate (ه ب to s.o. s.th.), tell (ه ب s.o. s.th.) V to inquire (ه of s.o.), ask (ه s.o.) VI to inform one another, notify one another; keep one another informed; to correspond, write each other; to negotiate, treat, parley (مع with s.o., في about) VIII to explore (ھ s.th.), search (ھ into), seek information (ھ about); to test, examine (ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to try, put to the
 test (ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to have tried, have experienced, know by experience (ھ s.th.); to know well (ھ s.th.) X to inquire ( ه عن of s.o. about), ask (ه عن s.o. about)
خبر ḳabar pl. اخبار aḳbār news; information, intelligence: report, communication, message; notification; rumor; story; matter, affair; (gram.) predicate of a nominal clause; pl. annals │ أخباره عن سأله to inquire of s.o. about s.o. else; كان خبر في كان or كان خبر في دخل (ḳabari kana) to belong to the past, be passé, be no longer existent
خبرة ḳibra, خبر ḳubr experience; knowledge
خبير kabīr experienced, expert (ب in); familiar, conversant, well-acquainted (ب with), cognizant (ب of); الخبير the Knowing (one of the attributes of God); (pl. خبراء kubarā’ ) expert, specialist │ خبير الضرائبtax expert, tax adviser
خابور kābūr pl. خوابير kawābīr  peg; pin; wedge
مخبر makbar sense, intrinsic significance; (pl: مخابر makābir ) laboratory
مخبار mikbār pl. مخابير makābīr  test tube (chem.)
مخابرة mukābara pl. -āt correspondence, (esp. written) information (in classified ads: ب المخابرة please write to ..., please contact ...), notice, notification, communication │ تلفونية مخابرة telephone call, telephone conversation; خارجية مخابرة (kārijīya) long-distance call; سرية مخابرة (sirriya) secret communiqué; المخابرات قلو qalam al-m. intelligence bureau; المخابرة حضوريا (ḥuḍūrīyan) apply in person (in classified ads)
اخبار ikbār notification, information, communication, note, message; report; indirect discourse, oratio obliqua (gram.)
اخباري ikbārī news-, information- (in compounds)
تخابر takābur negotiation; correspondence
اختبار iktibār pl. -āt exploration, study; examination; test; test item (of an examination); trial, testing; (scientific)
investigation, research, experiment; experience, empirical knowledge; practical experience │تحريرية اختبارات (taḥrīrīya) written examination items; ٥٢٢ ذاتي اختبار (dātī) personal experience; االختبار سبيل على experimentally; االختبار تحت on probation, on trial; االختبار حقول experimental fields
اختباري iktibārī experimental; experiential; empirical
اختبارية ihtibārīya empiricism
دائرة │ inquiry -āt pl. istikbàr استختبار bureau informationاالستختبارات
مخبر mukbir pl. -ūn reporter; detective
مختبر muktabar pl. -āt laboratory
خبز kabaza i (kabz) to bake (ھ bread) VIII do.
خبز kubz pl. اخباز akbāz bread
خبزة kubza loaf of bread
baker خبازة -ūn, pl. kubza خباز
خبازى kubbaiz, خبيز kubbaz, خباز
kubbazā mallow (bot.)
خبازة kibāza baker’s trade, art of baking
makābiz  مخابز pl. مخبزة makbaz, مخبز
bakery
خبص kabaṣa i (kabṣ) to mix, mingle, intermix (ھ ب s.th. with) II to mix, mingle, intermix (ھ s.th.); to muddle, jumble, confuse (ھ s.th.), make a mess (ھ of)
خبيص kabīl, خبيصة medley, mess, mishmash, hodgepodge; خبصة a jellylike sweet
خباص kabbāṣ one who causes confusion, who messes things up; an irresponsible, light-minded person
خبط kabaṭa i (kabṭ) to beat, strike (ھ s.th., against s.th.); to knock, rap (ھ on, الباب on the door); to stamp (االرض the ground; of animals) │ عشواء خبط يخبط (kabṭa ‘ašwā’) he acts haphazardly, he proceeds rashly or at random V to beat, strike, hit (ه s.o.); to bring down, fell, knock out, throw to the ground (ه s.o.); to bump, hit (ھ against), collide (ھ with), stumble (ھ over); to be lost, wander about, stray; to grope about, fumble about; to struggle, resist; to clatter over the ground, gallop (horse) VIII to
 bump (against); to struggle, resist; to grope about, fumble about; to be lost, wander around, stray; to stir, bustle
خبطة kabta blow, stroke; rap, knock; noise, din, uproar
خباط kubāṭ insanity, madness, mental disorder
خبل kabala u (kabl) to confound, confuse, mess up, complicate (ھ s.th.); to hinder, impede, handicap, stop, hold back (ه s.o.); to befuddle (ه s.o.), confuse s.o.’s (ه) mind, rob (ه s.o.) of his senses make (ه s.o.) crazy; -- kabila a (kabal, خبال kabal) to get confused; to be or become mentally disturbed, crazy, insane II to confound, confuse (ھ s.th., ه s.o.); to complicate, entangle, mess up, muddle, throw into disorder (ھ s.th.); to rob of his senses, drive insane (ه s.o.) VIII to become muddled, disordered (mind)
خبل kabl, kabal confusion; mental disorder, insanity
خبل kabil mad, crazy, insane; feebleminded, dim-witted
اخبل akbal   mad, crazy, insane; feeble- minded, dim-witted
اختبال iktibāl mental disorder
مخبول makbūl mad, crazy, idiotic, imbecilic, mentally deranged, insane; muddlehead, dolt, fool
مخبل makbal confused. baffled, perplexed, dismayed; muddled, confused, mixed up
(خبا (خبو kabā u (kabw, kubūw) to go out, die (fire)
خبأ see اخبية pl. خباء and خبايا خبأ ٦٢٢ see خواب pl. خابية
خبياري kibyārī caviar
ختر katara i (katr) to betray (ه s.o.), act perfidiously, disloyally (ه toward s.o.); to deceive, cheat, dupe (ه s.o.)
ختر katr disloyalty, breach of confidence, perfidy, treachery, betrayal, deception
ختار kattār traitor, disloyal person, cheat, swindler
خاتر kātir treacherous, perfidious, disloyal
ختل katala i u (katl, ختال katalan) to dupe, gull, cheat, double-cross, deceive (ه s.o.) III to deceive, cheat, dupe (ه s.o.); to behave hypocritically VIII = I
ختل katl and مخاتل mukātala deception, trickery, double-dealing, duplicity, duping, gulling
مخاتل mukātil deceitful, crafty, wily, foxy
ختم katama i (katm, ختام kitām) to seal, provide with a seal or signet (ھ s.th.); to stamp, impress with a stamp (ھ s.th.); to seal off, close, make impervious or inaccessible (ھ s.th.; also على the hearts, said of God); to put one’s seal (ھ on), conclude, terminate (ھ s.th.); to wind up, finish, complete (ھ s.th.); to close, heal, cicatrize (wound) V to put on or wear a ring (بالذھب تختم │ (ب (dahab) to wear a golden ring VIII to conclude, finish, terminate, wind up (ھ s.th.)
ختم katm sealing; -- (pl. اختام aktām, ختوم kutūm) seal, signet, seal imprint; stamp, stamp imprint; also = ختمة (see below) │ البريد ختمpostmark, (postal) cancellation stamp; الختم شمع šam‘ al-k. sealing wax
ختمة katma pl. katamāt recital of the entire Koran, esp. on festive occasions
خاتم kātam, kātam pl. خواتم kawātim  seal ring, signet ring; ring, finger ring; seal, signet; stamp │الزواج خاتم k. zawāj  wedding ring; النبيين خاتم k. an-nabīyīn the Seal (i.e., the last) of the Prophets =
Mohammed
خاتام kātām pl. خواتيم kawātīm  seal ring, signet ring; ring
ختام kitām sealing wax; end, close, conclusion, termination │الختام في at the end, at last, finally, eventually
ختامي kitāmī final, concluding │كلمة ختامية (kalima) concluding speech
اختتام iktitām end, close, conclusion, termination
خواتيم kawātim , خواتم pl. kātima خاتمة
kawātīm  end, close, conclusion,
 termination; epilogue (of a book); خواتيم
final stage
مختم mukattam ringed, adorned with a ring or rings (hand)
مختتم muktatam end, close, conclusion, termination
  ختنkatana i (katn) to circumcise (ه a boy)
VIII pass
ختن katn circumcision
ختن katan pl. اختان aktān son-in-law bridegroom
ختان kitān, ختانة kitāna circumcision
  خاتون look up alphabetically
خثر katara u and katira a to become solid, become thick, solidify, thicken; to be or become viscous, syrupy; to clot, coagulate (liquid); to curdle (milk) II and IV to thicken, inspissate, condense, coagulate (ھ liquid); to curdle (ھ milk) V = I
O خثرة katra thrombosis (med.)
خثار kutar dregs (of a liquid); scum of the earth, riffraff, mob
خثارة  kutāra dregs (of a liquid); sediment, lees 227
تخثر takattur coagulation │O المخ تخثر (mukk) cerebral thrombosis
خاثر kātir thickened, inspissated, condensed; viscous, ropy, sirupy; curdled, coagulated, clotted; yoghurt, curd
مخثر mukattar thickened, inspissated, condensed; viscous, ropy, sirupy; curdled, coagulated, clotted
خجل kajila a (kajal) to become embarrassed; to be ashamed (من of s.th. or to face s.o.), be abashed ( by s.th.), feel embarrassed (من about s.th. or in front of s.o.) II and IV to shame (ه s.o.); to embarrass, abash, put to shame (ه s.o.)
خجل kajal shame (من at); bashfulness diffidence, timidity, shyness; abashment; disgrace, shame, ignominy │للخجل يا (la-l- kajal) O disgrace! the shame of it!
خجل kajil abashed, embarrassed; bashful, diffident, shy, timid; overgrown with luxuriant, profuse vegetation; long and flowing (garment)
خجول kajūl abashed, ashamed, shame- faced; shy, bashful, diffident, timid
خجالن kajalān abashed, ashamed, shamefaced; shy, bashful, diffident, timid; bewildered with shame, embarrassed
مخجول makjūl ashamed, shamefaced
مخجل mukjil arousing shame, shameful; shocking, disgraceful, ignominious │ المخجلة اعضاء (a‘ḍā’) the pudenda
خد kadda u to furrow, plow (a the ground) V to be furrowed; to become wrinkled (akin)
خد kadd pl. خدود kudūd cheek; lateral portion, side │خده صعر ṣa‘‘ra kaddahū to put on a contemptuous mien
خد kadd and خدة kudda pl. خدد kudad furrow, ridge, groove, rut
اخدود ukdūd pl. اخاديد akādīd  furrow, ridge, groove, rut; trench, excavation
خد mikadda pl. مخاد makadd  cushion, pillow; seat cushion
خديج kadīj premature child
خداج kidāj abortion, miscarriage
خدر kadira a (kadar) to be numb, prickle, tingle (leg, arm); to be or become limp, benumbed, paralyzed; -- kadara u to confine to women’s quarters, keep in seclusion (ھا a girl) II to numb, benumb, stupefy (ه s.o., ھ a s.th.); to anesthetize, narcotize, put to sleep (ه s.o., ھ s.th.; med.); to confine to women’s quarters, keep in seclusion (la a girl) IV to make torpid, stupefy, benumb, deprive of sensation, narcotize (ه s.o., ھ s.th.) V to be numbed. be stunned, be stupefied, be deprived of sensation; to come to rest, calm down
خدر kidr pl. خدور kudūr, اخدار akdār, اخادير akādīr  curtain, drape; women’s quarters of a tent; boudoir, private room (of a lady)
خدر kadar and خدرة kudra numbness, insensibility (esp. of a limb gone to sleep); daze. torpor, stupor
خدر kadir numb (limb); benumbed, torpid, dazed
خدر takdīr anesthetization, narcotization
 خادر kādir limp, languid; benumbed, torpid, dazed; hidden in his den, lurking (lion)
خادرة kādira chrysalis (of a caterpillar;
zool.)
مخدر mukaddir anesthetic, painkilling, tranquilizing; (pl. -āt) an anesthetic; a narcotic, drug, dope
مخدر mukaddar numb, torpid, insensible; (eg.) tipsy, fuddled, drunk
مخدرة mukaddira girl kept in seclusion from the outside world 228
خدش kadaša i (kadš) to scratch (ھ s.th.); to maul, lacerate, tear to pieces (ھ s.th.); to violate (ھ the rules of decency, s.o.’s honor, and the like); to disturb (ھ the
peace); to ruin, sully, run down (سمعته sum‘atahū s.o.’s reputation) II to scratch ( ھ s.th.) j to maul, lacerate, tear to pieces ( ھ s.th.); to violate (ھ the rules of decency, s.o.’s honor, etc.); to ruin, sully, run down (سمعته sum‘atahū s.o.’s reputation)
akdāš اخداش kudūš, خدوش pl. kadš خدش
scratch, scratch mark; graze, abrasion
خدع kada‘a a to cheat (ه s.o., عن out of s.th.); to deceive, mislead, dupe, gull (ه s.o.); pass. kudi‘a to be mistaken, be wrong (عن about); to fail to see clearly (عن with regard to), get the wrong impression (عن of s.th.) III to cheat, dupe, deceive, take in (ه s.o.); to try to deceive or double-cross (ه s.o.) VII to let o.s. be deceived, be deceived, deluded, misled (ب by); to be mistaken, be wrong
خدع kud‘a pl. خدع kuda‘, -āt deception, cheating, swindle
خدعة kuda‘a impostor, swindler, cheat, sharper
خدع سوى sawwā akda‘ahū to crush s.o.’s pride, humble s.o.
خديعة kadī‘a pl. خدائع kadā’i‘  deception, deceit, betrayal, treachery, perfidy, trickery, imposture
خداع kaddā‘ impostor, swindler, sharper, cheat, crook; deceptive, delusive
خيدع kaida‘ fata morgana, mirage
اخاديع akādi‘  swindles, underhand dealings, crooked practices; phantoms, phantasms, delusions
مخدع mika‘, mukda‘, makda‘ pl. مخادع makādi  small room, chamber, cabinet; bedchamber
خداع kidā‘ deception, deceit, swindle, imposture, betrayal, treachery, perfidy, trickery, duplicity
خداعي kidā‘ī deceitful, fraudulent; deceptive, delusive, fallacious
مخادع mukādi‘ swindler, impostor, cheat, sharper, crook
خدل kadala a to stiffen, become rigid; to become numb, torpid, limp
خدم kadama i u (خدم kidma) to serve, be at service, do service; to have a job; to work; to wait (ه on s.o.); to serve (ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to render a service (ه to s.o., ھ to s.th.), stand up (ه for s.o.) │ األرض خدم to till or cultivate the soil; كثيرة خدمات خدمه (kidamātin katīratan) he rendered him many services; فالن ركاب خدم (rikāba) to be at s.o.’s beck and call; فالن مصالح خدم (maṣāliḥa) to serve s.o.’s interests; خدم القداس (quddāsa) to celebrate Mass (Chr.)  II to employ, hire (ه s.o.), engage the services (ه of s.o.); to give work (ه to s.o.), provide work (ه for) X to employ, hire, take on (ه s.o., ل for s.th.), engage the services (ه ل of s.o. for s.th.); to put in operation, operate (ھ e.g., a public utility); to employ, use (ھ s.th., ل for), make use, avail o.s. (ھ of s.th., ل for a purpose)
خدم kadam servants, attendants
خدمة kidma pl. خدم kidam, -āt a service (rendered); attendance, service; operation; office, employment, occupation, job; work
│ شيء خدمة فيin the service of s.th.; في خدمتكم at your service; للحقيقة خدم (kidmatan) in the interest of truth, for the sake of truth; عسكرية خدمة ('askarīya) military service; االجبارية الخدمة (ijbārīya) conscription, compulsory service; الخدمة السرية (sirrīya) secret service (pol.); خدمة القداس k. al-quddās celebration of Mass (Chr.) 229
 خدام kaddām pl. ة manservant, servant, attendant; woman servant, female domestic servant, maid
خدام kadāma attendance, service; employment, occupation, office, job
خدام kaddāma pl. -āt woman servant, female domestic servant, maid
تخديم takdīm work, occupation or duty of an employment agent (مخدم mukaddim see below) │ التخديم مكتب maktab at-t. labor office, employment bureau
استخدام istikdām (putting into) operation; use, utilization; employment, hiring (of an employee); service, occupation, position, job
خادم kādim pl. خدام kuddām, خدمة kudama domestic servant, help; manservant; woman servant; employee; attendant; waiter; deacon (Chr.)
خادمة kādima woman servant; female domestic servant, maid; woman attendant
خادمية kādimīya status of a servant
makādīm  مخاديم -ūn, pl. makdūm مخدوم
master, employer
مخدومة makdūma mistress, lady (of the house), woman employer
مخدومية makdūmīya status of the master or employer
مخدم mukaddim pl. -ūn employment agent
مستخدم mustakdim pl. -ūn employer; -- mustakdam (colloq. mustakdim) pl. -ūn employee, official
خدن III to befriend (ه s.o.), make friends (ه with s.o.); to associate socially (ه with)
خدن kidn pl. اخدان akdān (intimate) friend, companion, confidant
خدين kadīn (intimate) friend, companion, confidant
خديو kidīw, خديوي kudaiwī khedive
خديوي kidīwī khedivial
خذأ X to submit, subject o.s.
مستخذئ mustakdi’ submissive, servile, subservient, obedient
خذروف kūdrūf pl. خذاريف kadārīf  (spinning) top
خذروفي kudrūfī turbinate, toplike
خذف kadafa i (kadf) to hurl away (ب ھ، s.th.)
مخذفة mikdafa sling, slingshot, catapult
خذل kadala u (kadl, خذالن kidlān) to leave, abandon, forsake, desert, leave in the lurch (ه or عن s.o.); to stay behind; to disappoint; pass. kudila to fail, suffer a setback, meet with disappointment III to leave, abandon, forsake, desert, leave in the lurch (ه s.o.) VI to let up, flag, grow slack, languish, wane, decrease, fade, grow feeble VII to be left in the lurch; to be helpless; to be defeated; to meet with disappointment
خذل kidlān disappointment
تختذل ta!:d4u.l fatigue, languor, weakness, feebleness; relaxation, lessening of tension; disagreement, dissent, disunion
انخذال inkidāl forsakenness, desertedness, abandonment; defeat
خذل mutakādil languid, weak, exhausted, spent, effete
خذو X to submit, subject o.s.
استخذاء istikdā’ subservience, submissiveness, servility
مستخذ mustakdin submissive, servile, subservient, obedient
خر karra i (خرير karīr) to murmur, bubble, gurgle, purl (of running water); to ripple,
  خرب karaba i (karb) to destroy, wreck, demolish, shatter, devastate, lay waste (ھ s.th.); -- kariba a (خراب karāb) to be or become destroyed, ruined, waste, go to ruin, fall apart, disintegrate II to devastate, lay waste, destroy, wreck, demolish, ruin, lay in ruins (ھ s.th.) IV = II; V to be or become destroyed, ruined, waste, go to ruin, Call apart, disintegrate
خرب karb destruction, devastation خرب kurb hole; eye of a needle; anus خرب karib destroyed, demolished,
wrecked, devastated, waste; dilapidated, tumble-down, ramshackle; broken, ruined, out of order
خربة kirba pl. خرب kirab (site of) ruins; ruin, disintegrating structure خربة karba, kurba irreligion,
lawlessness
خربة kurba pl. خرب kurab hole; eye of a needle; anus
خربة kariba (site of) ruins
خراب karàb ruin, ruination; state of destruction or dilapidation; desolation; (pl. اخربة akriba) (site of) ruins
خرابة karāba pl. -āt, خرائب karā’ib 
disintegrating structure, ruin, ruins
خربان karbān, kirbān destroyed, wrecked, demolished, devastated, waste; ruined, broken, out of order
تخريب takrīb pl. -āt devastation, destruction, wrecking, demolition;
trickle; to snore; -- (karr, ٠٣٢
 kurūr) خرور
 sabotage
to fall, fall down, drop; to sink to the ground, prostrate o.s. │ األرض على خرfall to the ground; يديه بين خر (baina yadaihi) he prostrated himself before him; تحت خر قدميه (taḥta qadmnaihi) he fell at hill feet
خرير karīr purl, murmur, ripple (of water)
خرئ kari’a a (خرء kar’) to evacuate the bowels, defecate
خرء kur’ and خراء karā’ excrement, feces
خراسان kurāsān  Khurasan (province in NE Iran)
 تخريبي عمل ‘amal takrībī act of sabotage
خارب kārib annihilator, destroyer
مخرب mukarrib pl. -ūn annihilator, destroyer; saboteur
مخرب mukrib annihilator, destroyer
 خروب karrūb (coll.; n. un. ة) carob, locust; carob bean, locust pod, St.-John’s-bread
خروبة karrūba pl. -āt kharouba, a dry measure (Eg.; = 1/16 ١٩٢. = قدح l)
خربش karbaša to scratch; to scrawl, scribble
خربوش karbuš pl. خرابيش karābīš (syr.) tent
O مخربشات mukarbašāt graffiti
خربط karbaṭa to throw into disorder, disarrange, confuse (ھ s.th.)
خربق karbaqa to perforate, riddle (ھ s.th.); to spoil, mar (ھ s.th.)
خربق karbaq hellebore (bot.)
خرت karata u (kart) to pierce, bore, perforate (
ھ s.th.), make a hole (ھ in)
خرت kurt, kart pl. اخرات akrāt, خروت kurūt hole; bore, drill hole; ring, eye, eyelet
حريت kirrīt experienced, practiced, skilled; guide
خرتيت kartīt rhinoceros
خرج karaja u (خروج kurūj) to go out, walk out; to come out (من of), emerge (من from); to drive or ride out, go out (in a vehicle); to flow out, exude, effuse; to go away, depart, leave, retire; to protrude, 231 project, stick out; to leave (من s.th.); to dismount, alight, disembark (من from), get out, step out (من of); to emanate, issue, arise, originate, result (من from); to draw away, segregate, separate, secede, dissent (عن from), disagree (عن with); to deviate, depart (عن from an arrangement, from a principle); to be an exception (عن to); to be outside a given subject (عن), go beyond a topic (عن), exceed (عن a topic); to be alien (عن to), be extraneous (عن from), not to belong (عن to), be not included (عن in), have nothing to do with (عن يخرج ال ؛(عن it is limited to ..., it is nothing but ... ; to go forth (into battle); to attack (على s.o., s.th.), rise, fight (على against); to rebel, revolt ( على against); to violate, break, infringe ( على a rule, a regulation); ب عليه خرج to come up to s.o. with …, confront s.o. with
... ; to get out, bring out, take out (ب s.o.); to turn out, oust, dislodge (ب s.o.); to lead away, dissuade (ب عن s.o. from); to find out, discover (ب s.th.) │الخط عن خرج (kaṭṭ) to be derailed, run off the track (train) II to move out, take out, dislodge (ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to turn out, oust, expel, evict, drive out (ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to remove, eliminate (ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to exclude, except (ھ s.th.); to train (ه s.o., في in a skill, and the like); to educate, bring up (ه s.o.); to distill (ھ s.th.); to pull out, extract (ھ s.th.); to
 gather, deduce, infer (ھ s.th.); to explain, interpret, expound, elucidate (ھ s.th.) IV to move out, take out, get out, bring out, dislodge (ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to unload (ھ s.th.), disembark, detrain, etc. (ه s.o., e.g., troops); to turn out, oust (ه s.o.); to emit, send out (ھ s.th., e.g., electric waves); to stick out (ھ e.g., the tongue); to fish out ( ھ s.th. from the pocket); to bring out into the open, make public (ھ s.th.); to remove, extract (ھ s.th.); to eliminate (ھ s.th.); to expel, evict, exile, expatriate (ه s.o., من from a country); to dismiss, fire, remove (ه s.o., من from an office); من اخرجه ثروته (tarwatihī) to rob s.o. of his property, dispossess, expropriate s.o.; to give off, sound, emit (ھ s.th., e.g., a tone; said of a musical instrument); to set forth, state, express, utter, voice (ھ an opinion); to break (ريحا rīḥan wind); to educate, bring up (ه s.o.); to train (ه s.o.); to stage, produce (ھ a play; theat.); to bring out, make, shoot (رواية riwāyatan a film, said of a director); to except, exclude (ھ s.th., عن from); to pull out, extract (ھ s.th.); to select (ھ s.th.) V to be educated; to be trained (في in a school, college, also في من؛ in a field); to graduate (في from a school, from a college, also من) VI to part company, separate; to disengage, disassociate, withdraw from one another; to cede, assign, transfer, make over (عن ل s.th. to s.o.) X to get out, move out, remove (ھ s.th., من from); to take out, draw (ھ s.th., من from); to pull out, extract (ھ s.th., من from); to mine, extract, recover (ھ mineral resources); to win, gain, make (ھ a product, من from); to copy, excerpt (A s.th., من from a book or document); to derive, draw, deduce, figure out, compute (ھ من s.th. from); to elicit (ھ s.th., e.g., astonishment, من from s.o.); to find out, discover (ھ s.th.)
خرج karj expenditure, outlay, expense(s), costs; land tax; s.th. appropriate or suitable, that which is s.o.’s due, which s.o. deserves, which s.o. needs; (eg.) ration (food); (pl. خروجات kurūjāat) trimming; edge, edging, piping; pl. lace; trimmings │خراجك ھذا that’s what you need, what you deserve; المشنقة خرج k. al- mašnaqa one who deserves to be hanged
خرج kurj pl. خرجة kiraja saddlebag, portmanteau 232
خرجة karja pl. karajāt exit, departure; protrusion, protuberance, projection, salient part; (eg.) funeral
خراج karāj tax; kharaj, land tax (Isl.
Law)
خراجي karājī of or pertaining to land tax; of or pertaining to the taxed and cultivable area
خرج kurāj (coll.; n. un. ة, pl. -āt) skin eruption; tumor, abscess
خروج kurūj exit; egression, emergence; departure; exodus; emigration; raid,
foray, sortie (على against), attack, assault (على on) │ الخط عن خروج (kaṭṭ) derailment (of a train)
خريج kirrīj pl. -ūn graduate (of a school, college, or university) │الخريجين مؤتمر العرب mu’tamar al-k. al-‘arab Congress of Arab Graduates (a supra-national organization of university graduates advocating a unified Arab world)
مخرج makraj pl. مخارج makārij  (place of) exit; way out (of a difficult situation), outlet, escape, loophole, shift, dodge, excuse; articulation (of a sound); O cathode (el.) │الحروف مخارج علم phonetics
تخريج takrīj education, training (in schools, colleges); raising, upbringing, rearing (of children); extraction; derivation, deduction; interpretation, exegesis
اخراج ikrāj taking out, moving out, removal; unloading, disembarkment, detrainment; emission; moving, carting away, hauling off; evacuation; publication, publicizing, bringing before the public; extraction, removal; elimination; dismissal, removal (from an office); ousting, expulsion, eviction, expatriation, banishment (from a country); excretion (biol.); finding out, discovery, figuring out; training, formation, education; direction, production, staging (motion pictures, theater) │االخراج تولى (tawallā) to have the, direction (motion pictures, theater); اخراج من ... directed by (motion picture)
 تخرج takarruj graduation (from a school or college)
تخارج takāruj separation, disassociation, disengagement, (mutual) withdrawal
استخراج istikrāj taking out, moving out, pulling out, removal; withdrawing; extraction, derivation, gaining (of industrial products, etc.), mining, recovery (of mineral resources); preparation of an extract; excerpting, copying; deduction, inference; solution (of a problem)
خارج kārij outer, outside, outward, exterior; external, foreign j outside, exterior (n.); foreign country or countries; quotient (arith.); karija (prep.) outside, out of خارجا kārijan outside │عن خارجا outside of, apart from; الخارج في abroad, in foreign countries; outside; الخارج الى abroad, to foreign countries; to the outside, outward, out
الخارجة El Khārga (town in central Egypt, in Khārga oasis)
خارجي kārijī outer, out- (in compounds), outside, outward, exterior, external; foreign; nonresident │خارجية عيادة (‘iyāda) policlinic; خارجية وزارة ministry of foreign (external) affairs, foreign ministry; خارجي تلميذ (tilmīd) a student not living at a boarding school, a day student
خوارج kawārij  the Khawarij, Kharijites (the oldest religious sect of Islam); dissenters, dissidents, backsliders, rebels
مخرج mukrij pl. -ūn (screen or stage) director
مخرج mukraj excerpt, extract (from a book); مخرجات excretions (biol.) 233
متخرج mutakarrij pl. -ūn graduate (في or
من of a school or college)
مستخرج mustakraj pl. -āt extract; excerpt (من from), partial copy (من of)
خرخر karkara to snore
 خرد karida a to be a virgin, be untouched, innocent, chaste
خرد karā’id , خرائد pl. karida خريدة
kurud virgin; unbored pearl
 خردة kurda scrap metal, scrap iron; pl. خردوات
kardawāt notions, smallwares; small
goods, smalls, miscellaneous small articles; (eg. also) novelties, fancy goods for ladies
خردجي kurdajī dealer in miscellaneous smallwares
خردق kurdaq, kurduq small shot, buckshot
خردل kardal (coll.; n. un. ة) mustard seeds; mustard
خرز karaza I u to pierce, bore (ھ s.th.)
خرز karaz (coll.; n. un. ة) pearls
مخرز mikraz pl. مخارز makāriz  awl; punch
مخراز mikrāz awl; punch
  خرس karisa a (karas) to be dumb mute; to become silent, keep silent, hold one’s tongue IV to silence, reduce to silence, gag (ه s.o.)
خرس karas dumbness, muteness
خرس pl. karsā’  خرساء f. akras , اخرس
kurs, خرسان kursān dumb, mute
خرسان karsān  dumb, mute
  خرسان karasān, خرسانة karasāna concrete (béton) │O مسلحة خرسانة (musallaḥa) armored (or reinforced) concrete
خراشيف pl. )ة un. n. (coll.; kuršūf خرشوف
karāšīf artichoke
خرص karaṣa u (karṣ) to guess estimate (ھ s.th.); to conjecture, surmise (ھ s.th.), form conjectures (ھ about); to tell an untruth, a falsehood, to lie V to fabricate lies (على against s.o.); to raise false accusations (على against s.o.)
خرص kirṣ, kurṣ, pl. خرصان kirṣān, kurṣān earring
خراص karrāṣ pl. -ūn Ii&!', slanderer, calumniator
خرط karaṭa u i (karṭ) to pull off, strip (ھ leaves from a tree); to turn, lathe, shape with a lathe (ھ wood, metal); to exaggerate, boast, brag, lie; -- u (eg.) to cut into small pieces; to mince, chop, dice (ھ meat, carrots, etc.) II (eg.) to cut into small pieces, mince, chop (ھ s.th.) VII to be turned. be lathed. be shaped with a lathe; to join, enter (سلك في في، fī silk an organization, a community), affiliate (في،
 سلك في with an organization, a community); to penetrate (في s.th. or into); to plunge headlong (في into), embark rashly (في upon); to labor, slave, toil │ البكاء في انخرط (bukā’) to break into tears
دون ذلك leaves); (of pulling-off karṭ خرط turnery turning, دون see خرط القتاد
خراط karrāṭ pl. -ūn turner, lather; braggart, bluffer, storyteller
خراطة kirāṭa turner’s trade, turnery, art of turning
خراطة karrāta skirt (syr.)
خرط karā’iṭ, خرائط pl. karīṭa خريطة
kuruṭ map, chart
مخارط pl. makraṭa mikraṭa, مخرطة
makāriṭ  lathe
خارطة kāriṭa pl. -āt map, chart
مخروط makrūṭ cone (math.); conic 234
مخروطي makrūṭī conic
خرطوش karṭūš, خرطوشة karṭūša pl. خراطيش karāṭīš   cartridge; lead (of a pencil); cartouche (arch.); daybook
خرطال karṭāl oats
خرطوم karṭūm pl. خراطيم karāṭīm  proboscis, trunk (of the elephant); hose
الخرطوم al-karṭūm Khartoum (capital of the Sudanese Republic)
خراطين karāṭīn  a kind of earthworm خراطيني karāṭīnī wormlike, vermiform خرطيط karṭīṭ rhinoceros
خرع karu‘a u (kur‘, خراعة kurā‘a) and kari‘a a (kara‘) to droop, be or become slack, limp, flabby; to be or become languid, soft, spineless, yielding VII do. VIII to invent, devise, contrive (ھ s.th.); to create. originate (ھ s.th.)
خرع kari‘ and خريع karī‘ soft, languid, yielding, spineless, devoid of energy, nerveless
خروع kirwa‘ castor-oil plant, palma Christi (Ricinus communis; bot.)
اختراع iktirā‘ pl. -āt invention مخترع muktari‘ pl. -ūn inventor مخترع muktara‘ pl. -at invention
خرف karifa a (karaf) to dote, be senile and feeble-minded; to drivel, talk foolishly
خرف karaf feeble-mindedness, dotage, senility; childishness (of an old man)
خرف karif and خرفان karfān feeble- minded, doting; childish; dotard
خريف karīf autumn, fall
خريفي karīfī autumnal
خروف karūf pl. خراف kirāf, اخرفة akrifa, خرفان kirfān young sheep, lamb, yearling; wether
خرافة kurāfa pl. -āt superstition; fable, fairy tale
خرافي kurāfī fabulous, fictitious, legendary
مخرفة makrafa prattle, drivel, twaddle, bosh
تخريف takrīf folly, delusion; foolish talk, drivel, twaddle, bosh, buncombe
مخرف mukarrif childish, foolish; (pl.
-ūn) prattler, chatterbox, windbag; charlatan
خرفش kartaša to shuffle, mix (ھ s.th.)
خرفوشة karfūša pl. خرافيش karāfīš  card of low value, discard (in card playing)
خرق karaqa I u (karq) to tear, rend, tear apart ( ھ s.th.); to make a hole (ھ in); to perforate, pierce, bore (ھ s.th.); to penetrate (ھ s.th.), break, pass (ھ through s.th.); to traverse, cross, transit (ھ s.th., a country); to violate, impair, infringe (ھ s.th.), encroach (ھ upon); to break (ھ a vow, and the like), commit a breach of ( ھ); to exceed the ordinary, be unusual, extraordinary, unprecedented, unheard-of
│العادة خرق to go beyond what is ordinary or customary IV to lurk, lie in wait V and VII to be torn, be rent, be pierced, be broken VIII to pierce (ھ s.th.); to cut, break, pass' (ھ through s.th.), penetrate (ھ s.th.); to traverse, cross, transit (ھ s.th.), travel through s.th. (ھ); to exceed (ھ e.g., a limit), go beyond s.th. (مسامعه اخترق│ (ھ (masāmi‘ahū) to shrill in s.o.’s ears
خرق karq tearing, rending, laceration; piercing, boring, perforation; penetration; disruption; breakthrough; traversion,
 crossing, transit; violation, breach; (pl. خروق kurūq) hole, aperture, opening │خرق العام من األمن k. al-amn al-‘āmm violation of public security; العادة خرق offense against common usage, violation of mores; اتسع الراقع على الخرق (ittasa‘a) the rent is beyond repair 235
خرق kurq and خرقة kurqa awkwardness, clumsiness; stupidity │ الرأي في خرق (ra’y) stupidity; folly, madness; الرأي في الخرق من ان ... it would be very unwise to ...
خرقة kirqa pl. خرق kiraq tatter, shred; rag; scrap (of paper); polishing cloth; eraser (cloth)
اخرق akraq  f. خرقاء karqā’ , pl. خرق kurq clumsy, awkward; stupid; irregular; illegal, illicit, unlawful
مخرقة makraqa trickery, sleight of hand, legerdemain, hocus-pocus, swindle
مخارق makāriq  a kind of pastry (tun.)
اختراق iktirāq penetration; piercing, disruption; traversion, crossing, transit
خارق kāriq and (للعادة or) العادة خارق exceeding the customary, unusual, extraordinary, unprecedented, unheard-of; pl. خوارق kawāriq  preternatural phenomena. miracles; that which transcends the conceivable or the rational
خوارق المصادفات supernatural; خارق الطبيعة │
k. al-muṣādafāt miraculous coincidences
مخترق muktaraq passage, passageway
خرم karama i (karm) and II to pierce (ھ s.th.), make a hole or holes (ھ in); to perforate ( ھ s.th.) VII to be pierced, be riddled, be torn; to be deranged, unsettled, disorganized; to come to an end, run out, peter out, get lost VIII to destroy, annihilate (ه s.o.); to carry off, carry away (ه s.o., of death); to break (الصفوف the ranks), pass through s.th. (ھ)
خرم karm pl. خروم kurūm gap, blank (e.g., in a manuscript, or the like)
خرم kurm hole │ االبرة خرم k. al-ibra eye of the needle
خرامة karāma drill, bit, auger, gimlet; punch, perforator
خرم akram  having a perforated nasal septum
تخريم takrīm piercing, boring, drilling; perforation; punching; lace-making, lace- work
تخريمة takrīma lace, lace-work, openwork, filigree
انخرام inkirām state of unsettlement, disturbance, disorganization, derangement
│التوازن في انخرام (tawāzun) disturbance of equilibrium
مخروم makrūm defective, incomplete (e.g., a manuscript)
مخرم mukarram perforated; done in openwork, in filigree
خرماشة kurmāša pl. -āt (ir.) harrow
خرنوب kurnūb carob, locust; carob bean, locust pod, St.-John’s-bread
خرنق kirniq pl. خرانق karāniq  young hare, leveret
خروع kirwa‘ castor-oil plant, palma Christi (Ricinus communis; bot.)
  خز kazza u to pierce, transfix (ه s.o.); to stab ( ه s.o., ب with) VIII to pierce, transfix (ه s.o., ب with)
 خز pl. خزوز kuzūz silk fabric
 خزر kazara uto look askance (ه at s.o.), give
s.o. (ه) a sidelong glance
 الخزر بحر baḥr al-kazar the Caspian Sea
خيزران kaizurān pl. خيازر kayāzir  cane, reed; rattan; bamboo
خيزرانة kaizurāna cane, stick
خزع kaza‘a a (kaz‘) to cut, sever (ھ s.th.)
خزعبل kuza‘bal idle talk, bosh
خزعبل kuza‘bala pl. -āt idle talk, bosh; joke, jest, hoax; fib, yarn; cock and bull story 236
خزف kazaf pottery, earthenware; porcelain, china; ceramics
خزفي kazafī (made of) porcelain; porcelaneous, porcelain, china (adj.)
خزاف kazzāf dealer in chinaware; potter
خزافة kizāfa potter’s trade, pottery
خزق kazaqa i to pierce, stab, transfix (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to drive, ram األرض في ھ s.th. into the ground); to tear, rend, rip apart (ھ
 s.th.) II to tear, rend, rip apart (ھ s.th.) V and VII pass of I and II
خزق kazq rip, rent, tear, hole (in a garment)
خازوق kāzūq pl. خوازق kawāziq  post, stake, pole; dirty trick │خازوق ھذا that’s tough luck!
 خوزق look up alphabetically
خزل kazala i (kazl) to cut off, sever (ھ s.th.); to hinder, prevent, hold back, restrain, keep ( ه s.o., عن from) VIII to cut off, cut short, end abruptly (ھ s.th.); to shorten, abridge, abbreviate (ھ s.th.); to stand alone (ب with an opinion)
اختزال iktizāl abridgment, abbreviation; shorthand, stenography
مختزل muktazil stenographer
خزم kazama i (kazm) to string, thread (ھ pearls) │ انفه خزم (anfahū) to pierce the nasal septum (of a camel) and insert the nose ring for the bridle; to make s.o. subservient to one’s will
خزائم pl. kizāma خزامة kizām, خزام
kazā’im  nose ring
خزامى kuzāmā lavender (bot.)
خزن kazana u (kazn) to store, stock, lay up, hoard, amass, accumulate; to keep secret, keep (ھ a secret) II and VIII to store, stock, lay up, warehouse (ھ s.th.); to store up, accumulate (ھ s.th.); to dam (ھ s.th.); to put in safekeeping, keep (ھ s.th.)
خزن kazn storing; accumulation, hoarding, amassing; storage, warehousing
خزنة kazna treasure house; safe, coffer, vault; wardrobe, locker; cupboard
خزانة kizāna pl. -āt, خزائن kazā’in  treasure house; vault, coffer, safe; treasury, treasury department (of an official agency), any office for the deposit and disbursement of funds; locker, wardrobe, closet; cupboard; library │خزانة الدولة k. ad-daula and عامة خزانة (‘āmma) public treasury, exchequer; الثلج خزانة k. at- talj icebox, refrigerator; الكتب خزانة k. al- kutub bookcase; library; خصوصية خزانة (kuṣūṣīya) private library; المالبس خزانة wardrobe, closet, locker
خزينة kazīna pl. خزائن kazā’in  treasure house; public treasury, exchequer; treasury, treasury department (of an official agency), any office for the deposit and disbursement of funds; cashier’s office; vault, coffer, safe; cashbox, till (of a merchant) │ الخاصة الخزينة (kāṣṣa) (formerly) the Royal Privy Purse (Ir.); الدولة خزينة k. ad-daula public treasury, exchequer; راصدة نقود خزينة راصدة، خزينة cash register
خزان kuzzān pl. -āt, خزازين kazāzīn  dam; reservoir; basin, sump, pool; storage tank (also for oil); - (pl. -ūn) storehouseman, warehouseman
مخزن makzan pl. مخازن makāzin  storeroom, storehouse; depository; stock- room, storage room; depot, magazine, warehouse; store, shop, department store; المخزن al-makzan the Makhzan, the Moroccan government (formerly: govemmental finance department; Mor.)
│ ادوية مخزن m. adwiya drugstore; مخزن االصدار m. al-iṣdār shipping room (com.); العفش مخزن m. al-‘afš trunk (of an automobile) 237
مخزني makzanī being under government control or administration. belonging to the government (Mor.) │مخزنية امالك (amlāk) government land (Mor.)
مخازني makāzinī pl. -īya native gendarme (Mor.)
aṭ-ṭarīq m. مخازن الطريق makāzin , مخازن
the nearest, shortest way, a short cut
مخزنجي makzanjī storehouseman, warehouseman
خزندار kazandār, kaznadār treasurer
تخزين takzīn storage, storing, warehousing; storing up, accumulation; damming
kuzzān خزان kazana, خزنة pl. kāzin خازن
treasurer
مخزون makzūn stored, stored up, deposited, warehoused; (pl. -āt) stock, supply, stock in trade
خزي kaziya a (kizy, kazan) to be or become base, vile, despicable, contemptible; (خزاية kazāya) to be ashamed (من of); -- kazā i to disgrace, dishonor, discredit, put to shame
 (ه s.o.); to shame, abash, embarrass (ه s.o.) IV to humiliate, degrade, dishonor (ه s.o.); to shame, put to shame (ه s.o.) X to be ashamed
خزى kizy, kazan shame, disgrace, ignominy │للخزى يا! yā la-l-kazā what a shame!
خزيان kazayān  f. خزيا kazyā, pl. خزايا kazāya ashamed, shamefaced, abashed; shameful, disgraceful, scandalous, infamous, base, mean, vile
مخزاة makzāh pl. مخاز makāzin a shameful thing, a disgrace; reason for shame; pl. shameful things, disgraceful acts, infamies
مخزي makzīy ashamed, shamefaced, abashed; embarrassed, confused; المخزي the Devil
مخز mukzin disgraceful, shameful, scandalous, infamous
مخزية mukziya pl. -at disgraceful act, infamy
خس kassa (1  pers. perf. kasistu) a (خسة kissa, خساسة kasāsa) to be mean, base, vile; to become less, decrease, diminish, depreciate, fall in value; -- kassa u to lessen, reduce, diminish (ھ s.th.) II to lessen, reduce, diminish (ھ s.th.)
خس kass lettuce (Lactuca sativa; bot.)
خس kassa (n. un.) head of lettuce
خس kissa and خساسة kasāsa meanness, baseness, vileness
خسيس kasīs pl. اخساء akissā’  mean, base, low, vile, despicable, contemptible, miserable
خسيسة kasīsa pl. خسائس kasā’is mean trick, infamy
خسأ kasa’a a (kas’) to chase away (ه s.o.); --
خسئ kasi’a a to be driven away, make off
اخسأ اليك scram! it! beat kasi’ta خسئت│
iksa’ ilaika do.
اخسأ aksa’  baser, meaner, more despicable; weaker
خاسئ kāsi’ spurned, rejected, outcast; low, base, vulgar, despicable, contemptible; disgraceful, shameful,
scandalous, infamous; futile, vain (attempt); weak, feeble, languid
خستكة kastaka indisposition
مخستك mukastak indisposed, unwell, sickly
خسر kasara a (kusr, خسار kasār, خسارة kasāra, خسران kusrān) to incur a loss, suffer damage; to lose, forfeit (ھ s.th.); to go astray, lose one’s way, get lost; to perish II to cause loss or damage (ھ to s.o.); to do harm (ه to s.o.); to destroy, 238 ruin (ھ s.o.); to corrupt, deprave (ه s.o.)
IV to cause a loss (ه to s.o.); to shorten, cut, reduce (ھ s.th.) X to grudge (على or في s.o., s.th.), envy s.o. (على or في) the possession of (ھ)
خسر kur loss, damage
خسران kusrān loss, damage, forfeiture; decline, deterioration; depravity, profligacy
خسارة kasāra pl. خسائر kasā’ir  loss, damage; pl. losses, casualties (في in; mil.)
│ خسارة يا what a pity! too bad!
خسران kusrān (eg.) loser; affected by damage or loss
خاسر kāsir lost, hopeless; involving substantial losses; loser; depraved, corrupted; profligate, disreputable person, scoundrel
مخسر mukassir causing damage, harmful, noxious, injurious, detrimental
خسف kašafa i (kasf, خسوف kusūf) to sink, sink down, give way, cave in, disappear, go down; to be eclipsed (moon); -- i (kasf) to cause to sink, cause to give way │ ﷲ خسف األرض به k. llāh bihī l-arḍa God made him sink into the ground, God made the ground swallow him up VII to sink, sink down, go down
خسف kasf baseness, ignominy, disgrace, shame; inferiority │ خسفا سام sāma kasfan to humiliate, abase, degrade (.s.o.)
خسوف kusūf occultation (astron.); lunar eclipse
خش kašša i u (kašš) to enter (في s.th.)
خشاش kišāš vermin, insects
 خشب II to lignify, become woody or woodlike; to line, face or cue with wood, to panel, wainscot (٨ ھ.tb.) V to lignify, become woody or woodlike; to become bard, still, firm, rigid; to stiffen, freeze (e.g., with panic)
خشب kašab pl. خشب akšāb wood, lumber, timber │األنبياء خشب k. al-anbiyā’ guaiacum wood, lignum vitae
خشبة kašaba pl. –āt, اخشاب akšāb piece of wood; a timber; pale, post; plank, board
خشبة المسرح coffin; al-mayyit خشب الميت│ على خشبة theater), a (of stage al-masraḥ “boards” the on المسرح
خشبي kašabī wooden, woody, ligneous, made of wood; timber-, lumber- (in compounds)
خشاب kaššāb pl. ة lumber merchant تخشيب takšīb paneling, wainscoting تخشيبة takšība pl. -āt, تخاشيب takāšīib 
barrack, wooden shed
تخشب takaššub stiffness, rigor, rigidity; stiffening
متخشب mutakaššib frozen, rigid; stiff, bard, firm
خشت kušt pl. خشوت kušūt javelin
خشاخيش pl. )ة un. n. (coll.; kaškāš خشخاش 
kašākīš  poppy
خشخش kaškša to clank, clatter, rattle; to rustle
خشخشة kaškaša pl. -āt noise; clank, clatter, rattle; rustle, rustling; crash
(toy) rattle )خشخشية =) شخشيخة
خشارة kušāra leftover (of a meal); offal, refuse; a discard, a worthless thing
خشع kaša‘a a (خشوع kušū‘) to be submissive, be humble; to humble o.s.; to fade (voice)
│ ببصره خشع (baṣarihī) to lower one’s eyes II to humble, reduce to submission (ه s.o.) V to display humility; to be humble; to be moved, be touched
خشوع kušū‘ submissiveness, submission, humility
خاشع kaši‘ pl. خشعة kaša‘a submissive, humble 239
خشاف kušāf various fruits, stewed and waked in syrup or rose water, compote
خشكار kuškār coarsely ground grain, grits خشكريشة kaškarīša scab, slough, scurf خشم II to intoxicate, make drunk (ه s.o.)
خشم kašm nose; mouth; vent, outlet
خيشوم kaišūm pl. خياشم kayāšim  nose; gills; also pl. خياشيم nose
خشن kašuna u (خشونة) to be rough, coarse, crude; to be raw, uncut, unpolished II to roughen, coarsen, make crude (ھ s.th.) III to be rude, uncivil, boorish (ه to s.o.) V to display rough, rude, or coarse, manners; to be rough, uneven; to lead as rough life XII اخشوشن ikšaušana to be rough, coarse, crude; to lead a rough life
خشن kašin pl. خشان kišān rough, crude; coarse (as opposed to ناعم nā‘im); rude, unpolished, uncouth; tough, harsh (life); hoarse, raucous (voice) │اللمس خشن k. al- lams coarse to the touch, rough, uneven, wrinkled; الخلق خشن k. al-kulq uncouth, boorish; القشرة خشن k. al-qišra thick- shelled; الخشن الجنس (jins) the strong sex
خشن pl. kašnā’ , خشناء f. akšan , اخشن
kušn rough, tough, harsh, rude, uncouth
الخشناء al-kašnā’ the vulgar, uneducated people
خشونة kušūna roughness, coarseness; crudeness; rudeness
خشي kašiya a (kašy, خشية kašya) to fear, dread ( ه s.o., ھ s.th., على for s.o. or s.th.), be afraid (ه of) II to frighten, scare, terrify, alarm (ه s.o.) V = I; VIII to be embarrassed; to be ashamed
خشية kašya fear, anxiety, apprehension
│من خشية kašyatan min for fear of
اخشى akšā more timorous, more fearful; more to be feared. more frightening
خشايا pl. kaāyā, خشيا f. kašyān . خشيان
timorous, timid, anxious, apprehensive
خاش kāšin timorous, timid, anxious, apprehensive
خص kašša u to distinguish, favor (especially, before others), single out (ه s.o.), bestow special honors (ه upon s.o., in preference
 to others); to endow (ب s.o. with), confer, bestow (ب upon s.o. s.th.); to apportion, allot, assign, accord, give, dedicate, devote (ه ب to s.o. s.th., in preference to others); with لنفسه to take possession (ھ of), demand (ھ s.th.; also نفسه به خص nafsahū); to be specifically associated (ه with s.o.), be characteristic (ه of s.o.), be peculiar (ه to); to apply in particular (ھ to), be especially valid (ھ for); to concern, regard (ه s.o., ھ s.th.), have special relevance (ھ to), bear (ھ on) │بعنايته خصه (bi-‘ināyatihī) to devote one’s attention to s.o., favor s.o. with one’s attention; خصه بالذكر (bi-d-dikr) to make special mention of s.o. or s.th.; منھم واخص (akuṣṣu) I mention, among them, especially (with foll. acc.); يخصني ال ھذا this does not concern me, this is none of my business II to specify, particularize, itemize (ھ s.th.); to specialize (ھ s.th.), narrow, restrict (ھ ل s.th. to); to designate, destine, set aside, earmark, single out (ھ ل or ه s.o. or s.th. for a purpose); to devote in particular, dedicate, assign (ھ ل s.th. to); to allocate, allot, apportion (ھ ل s.th. to); to appropriate (ھ ل funds for); to reserve, held, withhold (ھ ل s.th. for); to tie down ( ه ب s.o. to a special field) V to specialize ( ل in, also ب or في in a scientific field); to devote all one’s attention (ل to s.th.); to apply o.s. (ل to), go in for s.th. (ل); to be peculiar (ب to); to be chosen, destined, earmarked (ل for) VIII to distinguish, favor (ه ب s.o. with), confer distinction (ب ه upon s.o. by); to devote, give, accord, afford (ه ب to s.o. s.th., in preference to others); to dedicate (ه ب to s.o. s.th., e.g., one’s services); (with لنفسه) to take exclusive possession (ھ of), claim, demand (ھ s.th.), lay special claim (ھ to; also نفسه به اختص nafsahu); to be distinguished, be marked (ب by); to possess alone, in distinction from all others, have above others (ب s.th.), have the advantage over others (ب that); to be peculiar (ب to); to concern, regard (ب s.th.), bear (ب on); to be pertinent, have relevance (ب to), have to do (ب with); to be duly qualified, be competent, have jurisdiction (ب in; e.g., an authority); to have as a special function or task (ب s.th.)
خص lettuce (bot.)
خص kuṣṣ pl. خصاص kiṣāṣ, اخصاص akṣāṣ, خصوص kuṣūṣ, hut, shack, shanty, hovel
خصة kaṣṣa jet of water
خصاص kaṣāṣ interstice, interval, crevice, crack, gap
خصاصة kaṣāṣa crevice, crack, interval, gap
خصيصة kaṣīṣa pl. خصائص kaṣā’iṣ  special characteristic or quality, specialty, particularity, peculiarity
خصيصا kiṣṣīṣan particularly, especially, specifically
خصوص kuṣūṣ specialness; خصوصا kuṣūṣan especially, in particular, specifically │خصوص في بخصوص، and من خصوص (with foll. genit.) as to, concerning, regarding, with respect to, as regards; الخصوص بھذا and الخصوص ھذا من in this connection, in this matter, in this respect, about this, concerning this; على الخصوص and الخصوص وجه على (wajhi l-k.) especially, particularly, in particular, specifically
خصوصي kuṣūṣī; special; private, personal
خصاصة kaṣāṣa poverty, penury, privation, destitution, want
اخص akaṣṣ  more special, more specific │األخص على especially; األخص في do.
اخصاء akiṣṣā’  intimate friends, confidante
اخصائي ikṣā’ī see  خصى تخصيص takṣīṣ specialization;
specification, particularization, itemization; designation, destination (for a purpose); allotment, apportionment, allocation; reservation; (pl. -āt) appropriation, financial allocation; credit
على وجه التخصيص and على تخصيص│
specifically
تخصص takaṣṣuṣ specialization (esp., in a scientific field)
اختصاص iktiṣāṣ pl. -āt jurisdiction, competence; special province or domain, bailiwick (fig.); pl. prerogatives,
 privileges, monopolies; concessions (Intern. Law); االختصاص (ذات) ذو ( duly qualified, authorized, responsible, competent; االختصاص دائرة scope of competence, sphere of authority, jurisdiction, province, domain, field
اختصاصي iktiṣāṣī pl. -ūn specialist
خاص kaṣṣ special, particular; specific, peculiar; relative, relevant, pertinent (ب to), concerning (ب s.th.); earmarked, Designated, destined, set aside (ب for); especially valid or true (ب for), especially applicable (ب to), characteristic (ب of); distinguished; private; exclusive, not public │ب خاصة جريدة professional journal for ...; والعام الخاص (‘āmm) the special and the general; high and low, all people; الخاص الطبيب physician in ordinary 241
خاصة kāṣṣa pl. خواص kawāṣ  exclusive property; private possession; specialty, particularity, peculiarity, characteristic, property, attribute; essence, intrinsic nature; leading personalities, people of distinction, الخاصة the upper class, the educated; kāṣṣatan and بخاصة bi-kāṣṣatin especially, in particular │انفسھم خاصة في fī
k. anfusihim at the bottom of their hearts, deep inside
خاصية kāṣṣīya pl. -āt, خصائص kaṣā’iṣ  specialty, particularity, characteristic, peculiarity, property, special attribute, feature, trait, qualification; prerogative, privilege; jurisdiction, competence
خويصة kuwaṣṣa (dimin. of خاصة) one’s own business, private affair │في يدخل امري خويصة he meddles in my private affairs
مخصوص makṣūṣ special
مخصص mukaṣṣaṣ chosen, set aside, earmarked, designated, destined (ل for); allotted, apportioned, allocated; -- pl. مخصصات (financial) allocations; appropriations, credits; (daily) allowance; (food) rations │ اضافية مخصصات (iḍāfīya) extra allowances; الملك مخصصات m. al- malik civil list
مختص muktaṣṣ pertaining, pertinent, relevant, relative (ب to); duly qualified, authorized, responsible, competent; special; pl. مختصات muktaṣṣāt
competences │ المختصة المقاماتthe competent authorities; المختصة الدوائر competent (or authoritative) quarters
خصب kaṣaba i and kaṣiba a (kiṣb) to be fertile (soil) II to make fertile (ھ s.th.); to fructify, fertilize (ھ s.th.) IV = I
خصب kaṣib fertility; abundance, plenty; superabundance, profusion
خصب kaṣib and خصيب kaṣīb fertile, productive, fat
خصوبة kuṣūba fertility
تخصيب takṣīb fructification, fertilization
اخصاب ikṣāb fertility
مخصبات mukaṣṣibāt fertilizers
مخصب mukṣib fertile, productive, fat
خصر kaṣira a (kaṣar) to become cold; to suffer from the cold III to clasp (ه s.o.) around the waist, put one’s arm around s.o.’s (ه) waist VIII to shorten, condense, abridge, epitomize (ھ s.th.); to summarize (ھ s.th.)
خصر kaṣr pl. خصور kuṣūr hip, haunch, waist
makāṣir  مخاصر pl. mikṣara مخصرة
stick, baton, wand; mace, scepter
اختصار iktiṣār shortening, condensation, abridgment, summarization, epitomizing (of a statement); brevity │باالختصار and باختصار briefly, in short, in a few words
مختصر muktaṣar shortened, condensed, abridged; brief, short; concise, terse, succinct; (pl. -āt) short excerpt, brief exposition, synopsis, outline, summary, abstract, epitome, compendium
خاصرة kāṣira pl. خواصر kawāṣir  hip, haunch, waist │ خاصرته في شوكة (šauka) a thorn in his side
خصف kaṣafa i (kaṣf) to mend, repair, sew (ھ a shoe)
خصفة kaṣfa pl. خصاف kiṣāf basket (made of palm leaves)
خصلة kuṣla pl. خصل kuṣal, -āt tuft; bunch, cluster; lock, wisp (of hair)
خصلة kaṣla pl. خصال kiṣāl quality, property, characteristic, peculiarity, trait; (natural) disposition
 خصم kaṣama i to defeat (ه an opponent) in argument; to deduct, subtract (ھ s.th., من from): to discount (ھ a bill, a note III to argue, quarrel, dispute (ه with s.o. 242
to bring legal action (ه against s.o.), sue (ه s.o.), litigate (ه with); VI to quarrel, argue, have a fight; to go to law, carry on a lawsuit, litigate (مع with s.o.) VII to be deducted, be subtracted VIII to quarrel, argue, have a fight
خصم kaṣm pl. خصوم kuṣūm, اخصام akṣām adversary, antagonist, opponent; opposing party (in a lawsuit)
خصم deduction; subtraction; rebate; discount; pl. خصوم kuṣūm
liabilities (fin.) │الخصوم سعر si‘r al-k. discount rate, bank rate; الكمبياالت خصم k. al-kambiyālāt bill discount
خصمان kuṣamā’ , خصماء pl. kaṣīm خصيم
kuṣmān adversary, antagonist, opponent
خصومة kuṣūma quarrel, argument, dispute, controversy, feud; lawsuit
خصام kiṣām quarrel, argument, dispute, controversy, feud; lawsuit
مخاصم mukāṣim adversary, opponent, opposing party (in a lawsuit); antagonist; litigant
 خصى kaṣā (خصاء kiṣā’) to castrate, emasculate (ه s.o.)
kiṣya خصية kiṣyān, خصيان pl. kasīy خصى
a castrate, eunuch
خصية kuṣya pl. خصى kuṣan testicle مخصى makṣīy castrated, emasculated مخصى فرس (faras) gelding
 اخصائي ikṣā’ī pl. -ūn specialist; expert (of a specialized field)
خض kaḍḍa (kaḍḍ) to jolt, jog (ھ s.th.); to shake (ھ s.th.); to frighten, scare (ه s.o.)
خض لبن laban kaḍḍ buttermilk
خضة kaḍḍa concussion, shock, jolt; fright, terror, fear
خضب kaḍaba i (kaḍb) to dye, color, tinge (ھ s.th.); -- kaḍaba i and kaḍiba a ( خضوب kuḍūb) to be or become green (plant) II to color, tinge (ھ s.th.); to dye (
ھ s.th) XII اخضوضب ikḍauḍaba to be or become green (plant)
O خضب kaḍb chlorophyll (biol.)
خضاب الدم │O dyestuff dye, kiḍāb خضاب
k. ad-dam hemoglobin (biol.)
خضوب kuḍūb green, greenness, green color
خضيب kaḍīb dyed
خضخض ḳaḍkaḍa (خضخض ḳaḍkaḍa) to set in motion, upset, rock, shake (ھ s.th.)
خضخض kaḍkaḍa concussion, shock, jolt
خضد kaḍada i (kaḍd) to cut off, break off (ھ thorns) │ شوكته خضد (šaukatahū) to tame s.o., hold s.o. in check, curb s.o.’s power
خضر kaḍira a (kaḍar) to be green II to make green, dye or color green (ھ s.th.) │ خضر األرض (arḍ) to sow the land, till the earth IX to be or become green XII اخضوضر ikḍauḍara = IX
خضر kaḍir green, verdant; verdure, greenery; young green crop (of grain)
الخضر al-kaḍir, al-kiḍir a well-known legendary figure
خضرة kuḍra green, greenness, green color; - (pl. خضر kuḍar) vegetation, verdure, greenery, greens; meadow; خضر vegetables
خضري kuḍarī greengrocer
خضار kaḍār green, greenness, green color; greens, herbs, potherbs
خضير kadīr green
خضارة kaḍāra greens, herbs, potherbs
خضار kaḍḍār greengrocer
خضر pl. kaḍrā’ خضراء f. akḍar اخضر to (atā) اتى على االخضر واليابس│ green kuḍr havoc wreak everything, destroy
الخضراء al-kaḍrā’ “the Verdant” (epithet of Tunis); the sky 243
خضراوات kaḍrāwāt vegetables; greens, herbs, potherbs
الخضيراء al-kuḍairā’ Paradise
O يخضور yakḍūr chlorophyll (biol.)
 مخضرة makḍara meadow, lawn, turf, sod, greens, verdant land
مخضرات mukaḍḍarāt vegetables
خضرم kiḍrim pl. خضارم kaḍārim  abundant, copious; well-watered, abounding in water; openhanded, generous, liberal, munificent
مخضرم mukaḍram designation of such contemporaries of Mohammed, esp. of poets, whose life span bridges the time of paganism and that of Islam; an old man who has lived through several generations or historical epochs
خضع kaḍa‘a a (خضوع kuḍū‘) to bow, defer, submit, yield, surrender (ل to s.o., to s.th.), humble o.s. (ل before), obey, follow (ل
s.o. or s.th.); to be subject (ل and الى to a law, to a power, etc.), be under s.o.’s (ل or الى) control II and IV to humble, subjugate, subdue, make tractable (ه s.o.); to submit, subject, expose (ه ل or ھ s.th. or
s.o. to s.th.)
خضوع kuḍū‘ submission, obedience, humility, subjection
خضوع kaḍū‘ pl. خضع kuḍu‘ submissive, humble
اخضاع ikḍā‘ subjugation, subdual; subjection
خاضع kāḍi‘ pl. خضع kuḍa‘, خضعان kuḍ‘ān, kiḍ‘ān submissive, humble; obedient, pliant, tractable; subject, liable, prone (ل to s.th.)
خضل kaḍila a to be or become moist II and IV to moisten, wet (ھ s.th.) IX = I
خضل kaḍil moist, wet; juicy, succulent; refreshing, gay, lighthearted
خضم kaḍama i (kaḍm) to munch (ھ s.th., with a full mouth), bite (ھ into s.th.)
خضم kiḍamm vast (said of the sea); sea, ocean
خط kaṭṭa u (kaṭṭ) to draw or trace a line (على on); to draw, trace, sketch, design (ھ s.th.); to write, pen (ھ s.th.); to carve, engrave, inscribe (ھ s.th.); to outline, mark, trace out, prescribe (ل ھ for s.o. s.th.) │ سطرا) خطا خط) (kaṭṭan, satran) to draw a line; الشيب خطه (šaibu) his hair turned gray II to draw lines; to rule (ھ
s.th.); to furrow, ridge (ھ s.th.); to mark with lines or stripes, stripe, streak (ھ s.th.); to pencil (ھ the eyebrows); to mark, designate, earmark, indicate (ھ s.th.); to demarcate, delimit, delineate, stake out, survey (ھ land, real estate); to layout, map out (ھ roads) VIII to trace out, mark, outline, prescribe (ھ a way); to mark, demarcate, delimit, stake out, delineate (ھ s.th.); to map out, plan, project (ھ e.g., the construction of a city); to make, design, devise (ھ a plan); to plan (ھ s.th.), make plans (ھ for)
خط kaṭṭ pl. خطوط kuṭūṭ line; stroke; stripe, streak; (railroad) line, line of communication; telephone line; frontline (mil.); furrow, ridge; handwriting; writing, script; calligraphy, penmanship │O خط ارضي (arḍī) ground wire (radio); O الخط االسفيني (isfīnī) cuneiform writing; الخطوط األمانية (amāmīya) the foremost lines, battle lines (mil.); بارز خط (bāriz) relievo script; تلفوني خط telephone line; جوية خطوط (jawwīya) airlines; حديدي خط (ḥadīdī) and الحديد سكة خط k. sikkat al-ḥadīd railroad line, railroad track; الزوال خط k. az-zawāl meridian (astron.; = النھار نصف خط k. niṣf an-nahār); O المسماري الخط (mismārī) cuneiform writing; االستواء خط k. al-istiwā’ equator; الطول خط k. aṭ-ṭūl or طولي خط (ṭūlī) circle of longitude, meridian (geogr.); خط العرض k. al-‘arḍ or عرضي خط (‘arḍī) parallel (of latitude) (geogr.); المياه تقسيم خط
k. taqsīm al-miyāh divide, watershed; خط الكھربائية القوة k. al-qūwa al-kahrabā’īya power lines; الھاجرة خط meridian (grogr.); الخط عن خرج to derail, run off the rails (train); مستقيم خط على (mustaqīm) straightaway, in a straight line; outright, out and out; الخط طول على (ṭūl al-k.) all along the line
خط kuṭṭ section, district, quarter (of a city)
خطي kaṭṭī handwritten; linear; spear
خطة kuṭṭa matter, affair; condition, state; office, function, position
خطة kiṭṭa, kuṭṭa pl. خطط kiṭaṭ, kuṭaṭ a place of land acquired for the purpose of building a house; a place of real estate, lot; district; map or plan of a place of real estate, layout; plan, project, design,
 intention; line of action, course, policy, rule, precept, guiding principle │العمل خط
k. al-‘amal operation plan, work plan; طبقا مرسومة لخطة (ṭibqan) according to schedule, as scheduled or planned
خطاط kaṭṭāṭ pl. -ūn penman, calligrapher; -- tracing lines, leaving straight trace │خطاط فشك (fašak) or قذيفة خطاطة tracer bullet, tracer (mil.)
تخطيط takṭīṭ ruling, drawing of, or marking with, lines; lineation; designation, marking, earmarking; surveying, survey (of land); planning; projecting, mapping out, laying out (of cities, of roads); plan, design
تخطيطي رسم (rasm) rough draft, first sketch, design
مخطوط makṭūṭ handwritten; manuscript مخطوط makṭūṭa pl. -āt manuscript مخطط mukaṭṭaṭ striped, streaked, ruled;
furrowed; designated, marked, earmarked; planned, guided, controlled; (pl. -āt) sketch, design, plan, layout; map (of a city)
خطئ kaṭI’a a (خطأ kaṭa’) to be mistaken; to commit an error, make a mistake; to sin II to charge with an offense, incriminate, declare guilty (ه s.o.); to accuse (ه s.o.) of an error or mistake; to fine (ه s.o.; tun.) IV to be mistaken, to err, commit an error, be at fault (في in); to be wrong (في about, in); to make a mistake (في in, with); to miss (ه s.o., e.g., a shot; ھ the target); to escape (ه
s.o. or s.o.’s notice; a fact) │ أخطأ فأله(fa’luhū) (his omen was wrong, i.e.) his expectations do not come true, are not fultilled; that’s where he is wrong, that’s where he made a mistake! الشيء أخطأه (šai’u) (lit.: the thing escaped him, missed him, i.e.) he lacked it; التوفيق أخطأه he failed, was unsuccessful; استنتاجاته في أخطأ he drew the wrong conclusions; بين أخطأ الشيئين he confused the two things, he mistook one thing for the other
خطء kiṭ’ slip, lapse, fault, offense, sin
خطأ kaṭa’ and خطاء kaṭā’ error; mistake, incorrectness; offense, fault; kaṭa’an erroneously, by mistake │ ان الخطأ من ...it is (would be) wrong to …; الخطأ اصالح
iṣlāḥ al-k. corrigenda, errata, list of corrections; الخطأ قتل qatl al-k. accidental homicide (jur.)
خطيئة kaṭī’a pl. -āt, خطايا kaṭāyā mistake, blunder; slip, lapse; fault, offense; crime, sin; fine (tun.)
خاطئ kāṭi’ wrong, incorrect, erroneous; mistaken, at fault; (pl. خطاة kuṭāh, actually, pl. of colloq. kāṭī), f. خاطئة kāṭi’a pl. خواطئ kawāṭ’  sinner
مخطئ mukṭi’ mistaken, at fault, wrong; incorrect, wrong, erroneous
خطب kaṭaba u (خطبة kuṭba, خطابة kaṭāba) to deliver a public address, make a speech; to preach, deliver a sermon (الناس في and الناس an-nāsa to the people); -- (kaṭb, 245 خطبة kiṭba) to propose (ھا to a girl; said of the man), ask for a girl’s hand (ھا) in marriage (ل on behalf of s.o.; said of the matchmaker); to give in marriage, betroth, affiance, engage (على or ل بنته one’s daughter to s.o.) │ودھا خطب (wuddahā) and مودتھا خطب (mawaddatahā) he courted her love III to address (ه s.o.), speak, talk, direct one's words (ه to s.o.), turn (ه to s.o., orally or in writing) │بالتليفون خاطبه to telephone s.o., call s.o. up; بالكاف خاطبه (bi- l-kāf) to address s.o. on an intimate first- name basis VI to talk to one another; to converse, confer, have a talk, carry on a conversation; to write each other, correspond, carry on a correspondence VIII to seek a girl’s (ھا) hand in marriage, ask for a girl’s hand
خطب kaṭb pl. خطب kuṭb matter, affair, concern, business; situation, conditions, circumstances; misadventure, mishap │ ما خطبكwhat do you want? what’s the trouble? what’s the matter with you? ما
في خطبه what concern of his is ...? what has he to do with ...? ذلك خطب ما what’s it all about?
خطبة kiṭba courtehip; betrothal, engagement
خطبة kuṭba pl. خطب kuṭab public address; speech; lecture, discourse; oration; sermon, specif., Muslim Friday sermon, khutbah │ االفتتاح خطبةopening address
 خطاب kiṭāb pl. -āt, اخطبة akṭiba public address, speech; oration; letter, note, message │ ترحيب خطاب welcoming address; العرش خطاب k. al-‘arš speech from the throne; مستعجل خطاب (musta‘jil) express letter, special-delivery letter; خطاب تقدمة taqdima letter of introduction; O المقررة القيمة ذات خطابات (dāt al-qīma al- muqarrara) (= lettres avec valeur declarée) registered, insured letters (eg.); الخطاب فصل faṣl al-k. (in letters:) conclusion of the formal greetings by the words بعد اما amma ba‘du; conclusion, termination, end; decision; unmistakable judgment; الخطاب فصل وبينك بيني we’re through with one another once and for all
خطابي kiṭābī oratorical, rhetorical, speech-, lecturing (in compounds)
خطيب kaṭīb pl. خطباء kuṭabā’ (public) speaker; orator; lecturer; preacher, khatib; suitor (for the hand of a girl); fiancé
خطيبة kaṭība fiancée
خطابة kaṭāba preaching, sermonizing, oratory
خطابة kiṭāba rhetoric, oratory; speech, lecture, discourse
خطوبة kūṭūba courtship; betrothal, engagement
مخاطبة mukāṭaba pl. -āt address; public address, speech; proclamation; conversation, talk; conference, parley │ تليفونية مخاطبة telephone conversation, telephone call
تختطب takāṭub conversation; talk, discussion; (inter)communication (also, e.g., telephonic, by radio, etc.) │التخطاب لغة lugat it-takāṭub colloquial language
kuṭṭābخطا kuṭabā’ , خطباء pl. kāṭib خاطب
suitor; matchmaker
خاطبة kāṭiba pl. خطاب kuṭṭāb woman matchmaker
مخطوبة makṭūba fiancée
مخاطب mukāṭab addressed, spoken to;
(gram.) second person
اخطبوط look up alphabetically
خطر kaṭara i (خطران kaṭarān) to swing, wave, brandish (ب s.th.); to shake, tremble,
vibrate; to walk with a (proud) swinging gait; to strut, parade haughtily; -- i u (خطور kuṭūr) to occur (ل to s.o.), come 246 to s.o.’s (ل) mind │ باله على خطر (bālihī) the matter came to his mind, occurred to him, he recalled the matter (also باله في and بباله or. خاطر له خطر ؛(باله على he had an idea; امر ببال يخطر لم (lam yakṭur bi-bālin) an unexpected matter, s.th. one wouldn’t dram of; -- kaṭura u (خطورة kuṭūra) to be weighty; to be important, significant; to be grave, serious, momentous, dangerous, perilous, risky, hazardous III to risk, hazard, stake (ب s.th. بنفسه one’s life); to incur the danger, run the risk (ب of), risk ( ب s.th.); to bet, wager (ه s.o., على a stake) IV to notify, inform (ه s.o.), let (ه s.o.) know (ب about s.th.); to warn, caution (ه s.o.) V to walk with a lofty, proud gait; to stride, strut (with a swinging gait); to pendulate, oscillate, vibrate VI to make a bet (على against stake)
خطر kaṭar weightiness, momentousness; importance, consequence, significance; seriousness, gravity; -- (pl. -āt, اخطار akṭār) danger, peril, menace (على to); riskiness, dangerousness; risk; hazard; (pl. خطار kiṭār) stake, bet, wager │الخطر جليل of very great importance, momentous; خطر ذو dangerous, perilous; للخطر معرض (mu‘arraḍ) endangered, jeopardized; اشارة الخطر išārat al-k. alarm signal
خطر kaṭir dangerous, perilous, risky, hazardous; serious, grave, weighty, important, significant
خطر kaṭara pl. kaṭarāt pompous walk, strut; swinging gait; idea, thought, notion
خطار kaṭṭār pendulum (phys.)
خطير kaṭīr pl. خطر kuṭr weighty, momentous; important, significant; grave, serious │الشأن خطير of great importance
خطورة kuṭūra weight(iness), importance, moment(ousness); consequence, significance; gravity, seriousness
خطران kaṭarān swinging, oscillation, vibration
 اخطر akṭar  more dangerous, riskier; weightier, of greater consequence; more serious, graver
مخطرة look up alphabetically
مخاطر makāṭir  dangers, perils
مخاطرة mukāṭara pl. -āt venture, risk, hazard
اخطار ikṭār notification, information; warning
خاطر kāṭir pl. خواطر kawāṭir  ideas, thought, notion; mind; desire, inclination, liking │خاطرك ألجل (li-ajl) for your sake; خاطر كل من min'n kulli kāṭirin with all one’s heart, most gladly; خاطر طيبة عن ‘an ṭībati kāṭirin gladly, with pleasure; of one’s own free will, voluntarily; على خاطرك as you like; بخاطره اخذ to afford satisfaction to s.o., to comfort, reassure s.o.; من خاطر على اخذ to feel offended by, to take offense at; خاطره صدع ṣadda‘a kāṭirahū to trouble, bother s.o.; طمن الخواطر (ṭammana) to calm the excitement; ان بخاطره مر (marra) the thought crossed his mind that ...; لخاطرك اكراما (ikrāman) for your sake, to please you; الخاطر سرعة sur‘at al-k. presence of mind; الخاطر سريع quick-witted
مخاطر mukāṭir one who risks s.th., who takes a chance; daring, bold, venturesome
مخطر mukṭir dangerous, perilous, risky, hazardous
خطرف kaṭrafa (eg.) to be delirious,. to rave, to talk irrationally
خطرفة kaṭrafa delirium, raving
خطف kaṭifa a, kaṭafa i (kaṭf) to snatch, wrench or wrest away, seize, grab (ھ s.th.); to make off (ھ with s.th.); to abduct, kidnap (ه s.o.); to dazzle (٧٤٢ البصر al-baṣara the eyes) V to carry away, sweep away (. s.o.) VI to snatch or seize (ھ s.th.) from one another VII to be snatched away, be wrested away; to be carried away, be swept away VIII to grab, seize, take forcibly (ھ s.th.); to snatch, wrest, wrench (ھ من s.th. from s.o.); to abduct, kidnap (ه s.o.); to run away, elope (ھا with a woman); to make off (ھ with s.th.); to dazzle (البصر al-baṣara the eyes)
خطف kaṭf grabbing, forcible seizure, rape; abduction, kidnapping; خطفا kaṭfan rapidly, quickly
خطفة kaṭfa pl. kaṭafāt (n. vic.) a snatching away, a grab; sudden stirring, flash │البرق خطفة في (barq) instantly, in a trice, like a streak of lightning; من خطفة الشعور خطفات an impulse, a sudden emotion
خطاف kaṭṭāf rapacious; robber
خطاف kuṭṭāf pl. خطاطيف kaṭāṭīf  (iron) hook; fishhook; (coll.; n. un. ة) swift, a variety of swallow
خطيف kaṭīf pl. خطاطيف kaṭāṭīf  iron hook
اختطاف iktiṯāf grabbing, forcible seizure, rape; abduction, kidnapping
خاطف kāṭif pl. خواطف kawāṭif  ravenous; rapacious; rapid, prompt; quick, sudden; lightninglike; fleeting; short, brief │ذئاب خاطفة ravenous wolves; خاطفة صورة (ṣūra) snapshot; خاطفة حرب (ḥarb) Blitzkrieg
خطل kaṭila a (kaṭal) to talk nonsense IV do. V to strut, walk with a pompous gait; to walk with a proud, swinging gait
خطل kaṭal idle talk, prattle
خطل kaṭil garrulous, chattering, given to silly talk; stupid, foolish
خطم kaṭm nose, snout, muzzle (of an animal); front part (nose and mouth); foremost or first part; important matter │مخطمة اطل (aṭalla) approx.: to manifest its force, set in (e.g., of a disaster)
خطمي kiṭmī, kaṭmī (coll.; n. un. ة) marsh mallow (Althaea officinalis; bot.)
خطام kiṭām pl. kuṭum noseband, halter (of a camel)
خطو) خطا) kaṭā u (kaṭw) to step, pace, walk; to proceed, advance, progress │خطوات خطا واسعة (kaṭawātin) to take large strides, also fig. = to make extraordinary progress II and V to overstep, transgress (ھ s.th.), to cross (ھ s.th.), go or walk through s.th. ( ھ); to ford (ھ a river); to leave its banks, overflow (river); to cross, traverse (البحار the seas); to omit, disregard, ignore, pass by (ه so.); to go beyond s.th. (ھ); to extend (الى to); to exceed, transcend (ھ s.th.); to excel, surpass, outstrip, outdo (ه s.o.); to proceed, pass (ھ through s.th., الى to),
 leave s.th. (ھ) behind and turn to s.th. else (الى); to disregard (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) in order to turn one’s attention to (الى به تخطى│ (الى االمام (ilā l-amāmi) to promote, advance s.th. VII to step, pace, walk; to proceed, advance, progress
خطوة kaṭwa pl. kaṭawāt and kuṭwa pl. kuṭwāt, kuṭuwāt, خطى kuṭan step, pace, stride │خطاه في سار (kuṭāhū) to walk, or follow, in s.o.’s footsteps; فخطوة خطوة تقدم taqaddama kutwatan fa-kutwatan to proceed or advance step by step; خطوة اتخذ حاسمة (ittakada) to take a decisive step; وقفزة خطوتان kaṭwatan wa qafza hop, skip and jump (athlet.)
خطية kaṭīya (= خطيئة) slip, lapse, transgression, fault, offense, sin
خطاة kuṭāh pl. of خاطئ kāṭi’ sinner
خف kaffa i to be light (of weight); to be slight, insignificant; to become lighter, decrease in weight, lose weight; to decrease in intensity, grow lighter (color); to be nimble, agile, quick; to hasten, hurry, rush (الى to) II to make lighter (ھ s.th.), reduce the weight of (ھ); to ease, lighten, relieve, soften (عن ھ for s.o. s.th. difficult or oppressive, also من على؛ ھ s.th., e.g., s.o.’s situation); to lessen, decrease, reduce, diminish (ھ or من s.th.); to mitigate, alleviate, moderate, temper (ه or من s.th.); to thin, dilute (ھ e.g., a liquid); (gram.) to pronounce (ھ a consonant) without tašdīd
│عنك خفف kaffif ‘anka! cheer up! be of good cheer! سرعتك من خفف kaffif min su‘atika! slow down! عنه اآلالم خفف to soothe s.o.’s pains V to dress lightly; to disburden, relieve o.s. (of a burden); to rid o.s., free o.s. (من of s.th.); to hurry away ( من from), leave (من s.th.) in a hurry X to deem (ھ s.th.) light; to value lightly, disdain, scorn, despise (ب s.o. or s.th.), look down (ب upon), think nothing (ب of), make light (ب of), set little store (ب by); not to take seriously (ب s.th.), attach no importance (ب to); to carry away, transport (ه s.o., e.g., joy)

خف kuff pl. خفاف kifāf, اخفاف akfāf shoe, slipper; -- (pl. اخفاف akfāf) camel hoof; foot (of the ostrich); sole (of the foot) │ حنين بخفي رجع raja‘a bi-kaffai ḥunain to return with empty hands, without having
achieved one’s mission; to accomplish nothing, fail, be unsuccessful
خفة`kiffa lightless (of weight); slightness, insignificance, triviality; sprightliness, buoyancy; agility, nimbleness; inconstancy, fickleness, flightiness, levity, frivolity │ الحركة خفة k. al-ḥaraka, الحركة في خفة nimbleness, agility, quickness; الدم خفة k. ad-dam amiability, charm; الروح خف k. ar-rūḥ do.; اليد خفة k. al-yad manual skill, dexterity, deftness
اخف akaff  lighter; lesser, slighter; weaker │ الضررين اخف a. ad-ḍararain the lesser of two evils
al-k. ḥajar حجر الخفاف kafāf, خفاف
pumice, pumice stone
خفان kuffān pumice, pumice stone
خفيف kafīf pl. خفاف kifāf, اخفاف akfāf, اخفاء akiffā’  light (of weight); slight, little, trivial, insignificant; thin, scanty, sparse; nimble, agile, sprightly, lively; -- الخفيف name of a poetic meter │الحركة خفيف k. al- ḥaraka easily movable, very mobile; nimble, agile; الدم خف k. ad-dam amiable, charming; الروح خفيف k. ar-rūḥ likable, charming, winning, amiable; gay, in high spirits, cheerful; الظل خفيف k. az-zill likable, nice (person); العارضين خفيف k.
al-‘āriḍīn having a thin beard; العقل خفيف k. al-‘aql feeble-minded, dimwitted; اليد خفيف
k. al-yad nimble-fingered, deft; خفيف شاي
weak tea
تخفيف takfīf lightening, easing; lessening, decrease, diminution; reduction; allaying, mitigation, alleviation, palliation, moderation; commutation (jur.); relief; thinning. dilution (e.g., of a liquid) │التخفيف ظروف extenuating circumstances (jur.)
استخفاف istikfāf disdain, scorn, contempt; levity, frivolity
مخففة ظروف ẓurūf mukaffafa extenuating circumstances (jur.)
مخفف mukaffaf thin, diluted
خفت kafata u (خفوت kufūt) to become inaudible, die down, die away (sound, voice); to become silent, become still III بكالمه، خافت بصوته (bi-kalāmihī, bi-ṣautihī) to lower
 one’s voice IV to silence, reduce to silence (ه s.o.) VIII = I
خفوت kufūt fading (radio)
خفت kāfit dying away, dying down, becoming silent; inaudible; faint, dying, fading, trailing off (sound, voice); soft, subdued (light, color)
مختفت muktafit soft, low, subdued 249
خفر kafara u (kafr, خفارة kifāra) to watch (ه ھ،
s.o., s.th. or over s.o., over s.th.), guard,
protect (ه s.o., ھ s.th.); -- kafira a (kafar,
خفارة kafāra) to be timid, shy, bashful II =
I kafara V = I kafira
خفر kafr watching, watch, guard(ing)
خفر kafar guard detachment, guard; escort │ السواحل خفر coast guard (Eg.)
خفر kafar timidity, shyness, bashfulness, diffidence
خفر kafir bashful, diffident, timid, shy, embarrassed, coy
خفير kafīr pl. خفراء kufarā’  watchman; protector, guardian; guard, sentry, sentinel
خفارة kafāra watch(ing), guard(ing), protection; guard duty
مخفر makfar pl. مخافر maḳāfir   guardhouse, guardroom; guard, control post │ الشرطة مخفر m. aš-šurṭa police station
as-sawāḥil k. خافرة السواحل kāfira: خافرة
coastguard cruiser (Eg.)
مخفور makfūr under escort, escorted; covered, sheltered, protected
خفس kafasa u (kafs) to ridicule, scorn (ه s.o.), laugh, mock (ه at); to destroy, demolish, tear down (ه a house)
خفش kafaš day blindness, hemeralopia
اخفش akfaš , f. خفشاء kafšā’ , pl. خفش kufš day blind, hemeralopic; weak-sighted, afflicted with defective vision
خفاش kuffāš pl. خفافش kafāfiš  bat (zool.)
خفض kafada□ i (kafḍ) to make lower (ھ s.th.); to lower, decrease, reduce, lessen, diminish (ھ s.th.); to lower, drop (من ھ، s.th., also, e.g., the voice); (gram.) to pronounce the final consonant of a word
with i; to put (ھ a word) in the genitive │ جناحه خفض (janāḥahū)to unbend toward s.o., show o.s. open-minded, responsive, accessible to; -- kafuḍa u to be carefree, easy, comfortable (life); to sink, dip, drop, settle, subside; to become low, drop to an undertone (voice) II to lower, decrease, reduce (ھ s.th., price) │عليك خفض kaffiḍ ‘alaika! take it easy! جأشك عليك خفض (ja’šaka) cool off! calm down! relax! IV صوته اخفض (ṣautahū) he lowered his voice V and VII to sink, dip, drop, settle, subside; to be lowered, be reduced (price); to decrease, grow less; to be diminished
خفض kafḍ lowering, lessening, decrease, diminution, reduction; subduing, lowering, muffling (of the voice); curtailment, limitation, restriction; ease (of life); (gram.) pronunciation of the final consonant with i │القيمة خفض k. al-qīma devaluation (of a currency); العيش خفض k. al-‘aiš carefree, easy life; من خفض في ھو العيش he lives in ease and comfort; خفض الصوت k. aṣ-ṣaut lowering of the voice; الخفض حرف ḥarf al-k. preposition (gram.)
خفض kafiḍ low, soft, subdued (voice)
تخفيض takfīḍ lowering, cutback, reduction (esp. of prices); diminution, decrease, lessening, curtailment, restriction, limitation
انخفاض inkifāḍ sinking, dropping, subsidence; lowering, reduction; lessen ing, decrease. diminution, decrement; dropping of the water level, low water │جوي انخفاض (jawwī) low-pressure area (meteor.)
مخفض mukaffaḍ lowered, reduced, low, moderate (price, rate); lower
منخفض munkafiḍ low (altitude, frequency, price, etc.); soft, low, subdued, muffled (voice) │المنخفضة األراضي the Netherlands;
-- munkafaḍ pl. -āt low ground; depression (geogr.) 250
خفق kafaāqa i u (kafq, خفقان kafaqān, خفوق kufūq) to vibrate; to tremble, shake; to beat, throb, palpitate (heart); to flutter, wave, stream (flag); to flap the wings, flutter (bird); to waver, flicker; -- (kafq) to flash (lightning); to beat, whip (ه s.th.; eggs, cream, etc.); to make the sound of footsteps (shoe); - (خفوق kufūq) to drop
 one’s head drowsily, nod off, doze off ( خفقة خفق k. kafqatan); -- i (خفوق kufūq) to set, go down (celestial body) II to roughcast, plaster, stucco (ھ a wall) IV to flap the wings, flutter (bird); to set, go down (celestial body); to be unsuccessful, go wrong, fail, miscarry, come to nothing, be abortive; to fail, be unsuccessful (في in s.th.)
خفق kafq throb(bing) palpitation; beating, beat; footfall, footstep, tread (of a boot, of the foot)
خفقة kafqa pl. kafaqāt (n. vic.) beat, throb; tap, rap, knock; ticking noise, tick
خفقان kafaqān palpitation of the heart, heartbeat; throb(bing), beat(ing); f1uttering, flutter
خفاق kaffāq palpitant, throbbing (heart); fluttering, waving, streaming (flag)
O مخفقة mikfaga whisk, eggbeater اخفاق ikfāq failure, fizzle, flop, fiasco خافق kāfiq palpitant, throbbing (heart);
fluttering, waving, streaming (flag); الخفقان al-kafaqān East and West; الخوافق al- kawāfiq the cardinal points, the four quarters of the world
خافقي kāfiqī mortar, plaster, rough-cast; stucco
خف see خفان
خفى kafiya a to be hidden, be concealed; to be unknown (a fact; على to s.o.); to disappear, hide │ان يخفى ال it is well known that ...; as everybody knows ..., it is obvious that ... ; عليك يخفى ال you know very well ..., you are well aware (of it); -- kafā i to hide, conceal (ھ s.th.); to keep secret (ھ s.th.) IV to hide, conceal (ھ s.th.); to afford (ھ s.o.) a place to hide, shelter, hide (ھ s.o.); to keep secret (ھ s.th.); to disguise, conceal (ھ s.th., على or عن from s.o.) │ الصوت اخفى to lower the voice, speak in an undertone V to hide, keep o.s. out of view; to disguise o.s. VIII to hide, keep o.s. out of view; to disappear, vanish; to be hidden, be unknown; to be lacking, be missing, be absent │األنظار عن اختفى to be hidden or disappear from sight X to hide, keep o.s. out of view; to be hidden, be concealed; to be hidden from s.o.’s (عن)
view, become invisible (عن to s.o.), disappear from sight
خفي kafīy hidden, concealed; secret, unknown; unseen, invisible; mysterious │ االسم خفي k. al-ism anonymous; O خفية انوار (anwār) indirect lighting
خفية kufyatan, kifyatan secretly, clandestinely, covertly; عنه خفية without his knowledge
خفية kafīya pl. خفايا kafāyā a secret, a secret affair
خفاء kafa’ secrecy, hiddenness │الخفاء في secretly, clandestinely, covertly; في خفاء ال ان (kafā’a) it is quite evident, it is quite obvious that ...
اخفاء ikfā’ hiding, secretion; concealment; lowering of the voice
تخف takaffin disguise
اختفاء iktifā’ disappearance
خاف kāfin hidden, concealed; secret, unknown; unseen, invisible
خافية kāfiya pl. خواف kawāfin a secret; -- pl. الخوافى al-kawāfī the coverts, the secondaries (of a bird’s wing)
مخفي makfīy hidden, concealed 251 متخف mutakaffin disguised, in disguise مختف muktafin hidden. Concealed,
clandestine, covert, secret; disappearing, vanishing
مختفى muktafan hiding place, hide-out
خاقان look up alphabetically
خل kalla u (kall) to pierce, transfix (ھ s.th.) II to turn sour; to make sour, to sour, acidify (ھ s.th.); to pickle, marinate (ھ s.th.); to salt. cure with salt or in brine (ھ s.th.); to pick (ھ the teeth); to run the fingers (ه through s.th.), part, comb (ھ the hair, the beard, also with the fingers) III to treat (ه s.o.) as a friend IV to offend (ب against), infringe, transgress (ب s.th.); to violate, break (ب s.th., e.g., a rule, a custom); to fail to fulfill, fail to meet (ب an agreement); to forsake, desert, abandon (ب s.o., s.th.); to disturb, upset, harm, prejudice (ب s.th.) V to be, lie or come between s.th. (ھ; also in time), intervene ( ھ between); to be located or situated, be
 Interposed, be placed (ھ between); to Permeate, pervade, interpenetrate (ھ s.th.), mix, mingle, blend (ھ with) VIII to be or become defective; to be in disorder, be faulty, deficient, imperfect; to become disordered; to be upset, be unbalanced; to be disturbed (order, system) │الشروط اختلت the conditions are not fulfilled; توازنه اختل (tawāzunuhū) to lose one’s balance, become unbalanced; عقله اختل (‘aqluhū) to be mentally deranged
خل kall vinegar
خل kill, kull pl. اخالل aklāl friend, bosom friend
خلل kalal pl. خالل kilāl gap, interval, interstice; cleft, crack, rupture, fissure; a defective, unbalanced state, imbalance; defectiveness, imperfection; fault, flaw, defeat, shortcoming; disturbance, upset, disorder; damage, injury, harm (that s.th. suffers or suffered); خالل kilāla during; between; through │خلل في fī kalali and في خالل fī kilāli during; in the course of, within, in a given period of; ذلك خالل في meanwhile, in the meantime; خالل من min kilāli across, through, right through the middle of; out of, from within; (to judge, reason, draw conclusions, etc.) by, on the basis of, on the strength of, (to recognize) from
خلة kalla need, want, luck; -- (pl. خالل (kilāl) property, attribute, peculiarity; characteristic; natural disposition
خلة kulla pl. خلل kulal friendship
خالل kilāl pl. اخلة akilla boring or drilling implement; peg, pin; spit, skewer; (also خاللة pl. -āt) toothpick; see also خلل kalal
خليل kalīl pl. اخالء akillā’ , خالن kullān friend, bosom friend; lovers; الخليل Hebron (town in Jordanian Palestine) │ﷲ خليل epithet of Abraham
خليلة kalīla pl. -āt girl friend, woman friend; sweetheart, paramour
الخلول ام umm al-kulūl river mussel (zool.)
اخالل iklāl pl. -āt breach, infraction, violation (of a law, of a treaty, and the like); offence (against), transgression,
infringement (of); disturbance (of an order, of a system); impairment, injury, harm (to); average, damage, by sea │مع ب االخالل عدم (‘adami l-i.) without prejudice to, without detriment to اختالل iktilāl deficiency, defectiveness, imperfection; (a falling into) disrepair, deterioration; faultiness; disturbance (of a system, of a function, of the equilibrium, etc.); disorder, confusion
مخلل mukallal pickled; salted; (pl. -āt) pickles, pickled vegetables
مخل mukill disgraceful, shameful │مخل باآلداب immoral, indecent, improper 252
خلب kalaba i u (kalb) to seize with the claws, clutch (ھ s.th.), pounce (ھ on); -- u (خالبة kilāba) to cajole, coax, wheedle (ه s.o.); to inveigle, beguile, bewitch, enchant (ه s.o., عقله ‘aqlahū s.o.’s mind); to charm, fascinate, captivate (ه s.o.) III to cajole, wheedle, coax. inveigle, beguile, bewitch, enchant (ه s.o.) VIII to seize with the claws, clutch (ھ s.th.), pounce (ھ on); to cajole, inveigle, beguile, bewitch, enchant (ه s.o.)
خلب kilb pl. اخالب aklāb fingernail, claw, talon
خلب برق barqun kallābun and barqu kullabin lightning without a downpour; a disappointing, disillusioning matter; خلب and برق من خلب delusion, illusion
خلبي kullabī: خلب فشك (fašak) blank cartridges (Syr.; mil.)
خالب kallāb gripping, captivating, fascinating; attractive, engaging, winning; tempting, enticing; fraudulent, deceitful; deceptive, delusive, fallacious
خالبة kilāba engaging manners, attractiveness, charm
مخلب miklab pl. مخالب makālib claw, talon
kallāb خالب = kālib خالب
خلبص II kalbaṣa (eg.) to clown
خلبوص kalbūṣ pl. خالبيص kalābīṣ , خالبصة kalābiṣa (eg.) clown, buffoon, harlequin
خلج kalaja i and III to be on s.o.’s (ه) mind, trouble, preoccupy, prepossess (ه s.o.,
 s.o.’s mind; said of worries, doubts, etc.); to pervade, fill (ه s.o.; said of a feeling) │ قلبه خالج (qalbahū) to be uppermost in s.o.’s heart V to be shaken, be convulsed, be rocked VIII to quiver, tremble, quake, shake; to twitch (eye, limb, body); to animate, move, stir, inspire, fill, pervade, possess (في ھ، the heart; said of a feeling)
│ غما اختلج (gamman) to be filled with sorrow, with grief (heart)
خلجة kalja pl. ka1ajāt emotion, sentiment; scruple, qualm, misgiving
خليج kalīj pl. خلج kulj, خلجان kuljān bay, gulf; canal; الخليج name of Cairo’s ancient city canal which was abandoned and leveled at the end of the 19  century │ الفارسي الخليج the Persian Gulf
خالج kilāj misgiving, doubt, scruple, qualm
اختالجة iktilāja (n. vic.) convulsion, jerk, twitch; tremor
خالجة kālija pl. خوالج kawālij  emotion, sentiment; scruple, qualm; idea
خلخل kalkala to shake, convulse, rock (ھ s.th.); to rarefy (ھ s.th., e.g., air; chem.- phys.) II takalkala to be shaken, be rocked; to come off, become disjointed, become detached; to become loose, work loose; to be or become rarefied (chem.- phys.)
خلخل kalkal pl. خالخل kalākil  anklet خلخال kalkāl pl. خالخيل kalākīl   anklet تخلخل takalkul rarefication
mutakalkil متخلخل and mukalkal مخلخل
rarefied
خلد kalada u (خلود kulūd) to remain or last forever, be everlasting; to be immortal, deathless, undying; to abide forever (الى or ب in, with); to remain, stay (الى or ب or ل at a place) │ الراحة الى خلدto rest, relax; خلد النوم الى to lie down to sleep II to make eternal or everlasting, perpetuate, eternalize (ھ s.th.), make immortal, immortalize (ھ s.o.); to make ineffaceable, unforgettable (ھ s.th.; a memory); to remain, stay, abide, linger (ب at, in a place); to grow very old, enjoy a long life, be long-lived IV to eternize, immortalize, make immortal (ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to perpetuate (ھ s.th.); to remain,
stay, abide, linger (الى or ب at, in a place) 253 to be disposed, incline, lean, tend (الى to) V to become eternal or immortal, perpetuate o.s. j to be or become long, lasting, perpetual
خلد kuld infinite duration, endless time, perpetuity, eteruity │ الخلد دارParadise, the hereafter
خلد kuld mole (zool.)
خلد kalad, pl. اخالد aklād mind, heart, spirit, temper
خلود kulūd infinite duration, endless time, perpetuity, eternity; eternal life, immortality; abiding, remaining, staying
تخليد taklīd perpetuation, eternization, immortalization
خالد kālid everlasting, perpetual, eternal; immortal, deathless, undying; unforgettable, glorious; pl. خوالد kawālid  mountains │الخالدات الجزائر the Canary Islands
مخلد muklid disposed, inclined, tending (الى to)
خلس kalasa i (kals) to steal (ھ s.th.); to pilfer, filch, swipe, purloin (ھ s.th.) III النظر خلسه (naẓara) to glance furtively at s.o. VIII to steal, pilfer, filch, swipe (ھ s.th.); to get under false pretenses or by crooked means (ھ s.th.); to embezzle, misappropriate (ھ s.th.); to spend secretly (ھ hours) │اختلس الى الخطى (kuṭā) to sneak up on s.o.; اختلس في) الى النظر) to glance furtively at s.o.
خلسة kulsatan by stealth, stealthily, surreptitiously, furtively
خالسي kilāsī mulatto, bastard
اختالس iktilās pl. -āt embezzlement, misappropriation, defalcation
مختلس muktalis embezzler, defalcator
خلص kalaṣa u (خلوص kulūṣ) to be pure, unmixed, unadulterated; to belong (ل to s.o.); to get, come (الى to), arrive (الى at); -- (خالص kallāṣ) to be or become free, be freed, be liberated (من from), be cleared, get rid (من of); to be saved, be rescued, escape (من from); to be redeemed, be delivered, attain salvation (Chr.); -- (colloq.) to be finished, be done, be through, be over; to be all gone II to clear,
 purify, refine, purge, rectify (ھ s.th.); to clarify (ھ a situation); to liberate, free, save, rescue (ه s.o., من from), rid (. s.o., من of); to redeem, deliver (Chr.); to prepay the postage (على on); to pay duty (على البضائع on merchandise), clear (على goods); to settle (ھ a bill); (colloq.) to finish (ھ s.th.) │حقه خلص (ḥaqqahū) to restore one’s right, secure one’s due III to act with integrity, with sincerity (ه toward s.o.), treat (ه s.o.) fair and square; to get even, become quits (ه with s.o.) IV to dedicate ( ل ھ to s.o. s.th.); to be loyal (ل to s.o.); to be devoted, be faithful (ل to) │له اخلص الحب (ḥubba) to love s.o. dearly; <I اخلص دينه (li-llāhi dīnahū) to worship God faithfully and sincerely V to rid o.s. (من of), free o.s. (من from), get rid (من of); to be freed, be delivered, be saved, be rescued, escape (من from) VI to act with reciprocal integrity and sincerity; to be quits, be even X to extract (ھ s.th., من from); to copy, excerpt (ھ s.th., من from); to abstract, take, gather, work out (ھ s.th., as the quintessence, من of); to deduce, infer, derive (من s.th., من from); to discover, make out, find out (ھ s.th.); to select, choose (ھ s.th.) ; to demand payment of a sum (ھ) and get it (من from s.o.) │من فائدة استخلص to derive profit from, profit, benefit from; وعدا منه استخلص (wa‘dan) to exact a promise from s.o.
خالص kalāṣ liberation, deliverance, riddance; rescue, salvation (من from); redemption (Chr.); payment, settlement, liquidation (of a bill); receipt; placenta, afterbirth 254
خالصة kulāṣa pl. -āt excerpt; extract, essence; quintessence, substance, gist (of s.th.); abstract, resume, summary, epitome; synopsis │نھائية خالصة (nihā’īya) summation (jur.); الالھوتية الخالصة (al- lāhītīya) the “summa theological” (of Thomas Aquinas); عطرية خالصة (‘iṭrīya) perfume essence; والخالصة in short, briefly, in a word (introducing a summary of the basic ideas)
خليص kalīṣ, pl. خلصاء kulaṣā’  pure, clear, unmixed, unadulterated; sincere, faithful, loyal; loyal adherent
خلوص kulūṣ clearness, purity; sincerity, candor; frankness
خالص kallāṣ (magr.) tax collector
مخلص maklaṣ safe place; refuge, escape, rescue, salvation, deliverance
تخليص taklīṣ clearing, purification, refining, rectification; clarification; liberation, extrication, deliverance, rescue, salvation; payment, settlement, liquidation; prepayment of postage (على on); customs clearance, payment of duty ( البضائع على on merchandise; also تخليص البضائع)
مخالصة mukālaṣa pl. -āt receipt
اخالص iklāṣ sincere devotion, loyal attachment, sincere affection; sincerity, frankness, candor; loyalty, faithfulness, fidelity, allegiance (ل to)
تخلص takalluṣ freedom, liberation, release, extrication, escape (من from)
استخالص istiklāṣ extraction; excerption; derivation, deduction; selection; collecting (of a sum of money)
خالص kāliṣ pl. خلص kullaṣ clear; pure, unmixed, unadulterated; sincere, frank, candid, true; free, exempt (من from) │ األجرة خالص k. al-ujra post-free; الرد خالص
k. ar-radd prepaid, reply paid for (telegram); الكمرك من خالص (gumrug) dutyfree; الضريبة خالص tax-exempt
مخلص mukalliṣ liberator; Savior, Redeemer (Chr.)
عليه) مخلص) mukallaṣ (‘alaihi) postage paid
مخلص mukliṣ devoted; sincere, frank, candid; loyal; faithful (ل to s.o., to s.th.); purehearted, virtuous, righteous; المخلص (in letters) approx.: yours truly …, sincerely yours ...
مستخلص mustaklaṣ pl. -āt extract, excerpt
خلط kalaṭa i (kalṭ) to mix, mingle, commingle, blend (ھ ب s.th. with); to confuse, confound, mix up (بين two things; وبين – بين s.th. with), mistake (و -- بين s.th. for) II to mix, mingle, commingle, blend (ھ s.th.); to cause confusion III to mix, mingle, blend, merge, fuse (ھ with s.th.); to meddle (ھ in), interfere (ھ with); to mix, associate (ه with s.o.); to have to do (ه with
 s.o.) │نفسه خالط (nafsahū) to befall, attack
s.o. (pain, etc.); عقله في خولط kūliṭa fī ‘aqlihi to be or become disordered in mind VIII to be mixed, mix, mingle, form a mixture or blend; to consist of a heterogeneous mixture, be motley, promiscuous; to associate, be on intimate terms (ب with); to be or become confused, get all mixed up
خلط kalṭ mixing, blending; combination; mingling, commingling (ب with); confusing, confounding, mistaking, mix-up, confusion
خلط kilṭ pl. اخالط aklāṭ component of a mixture; ingredient; pl. mixture, blend │ االنسان اخالط the four humors of the human body (blood, phlegm, yellow bile, and black bile); الناس من اخالط common people, populace, rabble, riffraff, mob; ملط خلط kilṭ milṭ, kalṭ malṭ motley, pell-mell, promiscuously 255
خلطة kalṭa mixture, blend, medley
خلطة kulta company; mixture
خالط and خالطة kallāṭa pl. -āt mixer, mixing machine
خليط kalīṭ mixed, blended; motley, heterogeneous, promiscuous; mixture, blend (من of); medley, hodgepodge; (pl. خلطاء kulaṭā’ ) associate, companion, comrade
تخليط taklīṭ pl. -āt insanity; delirium
مخالطة mukālaṭa company, intercourse, association
اختالط iktilāṭ (process of) mixing, blending; mingling, commingling; confusion; mental disorder; (social) intercourse, association, dealings (ب with)
makālīṭ  مخاليط pl. maklūṭ مخلوط
mixture, blend; alloy
مخلط mukallaṭ confused, disordered
مخالط mukālaṭ stricken, afflicted (ب e.g., by a disease)
المحاكم المختلطة │ mixed muktaliṭ مختلط محكمة؛ تعليم مختلط see courts, mixed the coeducation
خلع kala‘a a (kal‘) to take off, put off, slip off (
ھ a garment); to doff, take off (طربوشة
one’s tarboosh); to extract, pull (ھ a tooth); to wrench, dislocate, luxate (ھ a joint); to depose, remove, dismiss, discharge (ه s.o., من from an office); to renounce, forgo, give up (ھ s.th.), withdraw (ھ from); to throw off, cost off ( عذاره ‘idārahū one’s restraint, one’s inhibitions); to refuse (الطاعة obedience); to disown, repudiate (ابنه one’s son); to divorce (ھا one’s wife) in return for a compensation to be paid by her; to get through, have done (ھ with s.th.), be through, have gone through s.th. (ھ, e.g., a hard day); to impart (ھ على s.th. to); to confer, bestow (ھ على s.th. upon s.o.), grant, award (ھ على s.th. to s.o.) │ ثيابه خلع (tiyābahū) to undress; العرش من خلعه (‘arš) to dethrone s.o.; خلعة عليه خلع (kil‘atan) to bestow a robe of honor upon s.o.; على خلع حق نفسه (ḥaqqa) to arrogate to o.s. the right of ...; -- kalu‘a u (خالعة kalā‘a) to be dissolute, morally depraved II to take away, remove, displace, dislocate (ھ s.th.); to knock out of joint, take or break apart (ھ s.th.); pass. kulli‘a to fall to pieces, get out of joint III to divorce (ھا one’s wife, in return for a compensation to be paid by her) V to go to pieces, fall apart, break; to become or be luxated, dislocated (joint); to take a vacation in the country (tun.) │ الشراب في تخلع(šarāb) to be addicted to drinking, drink heavily VII to be displaced, be dislocated, be removed; to be divested, be deprived, be stripped ( من of s.th.), forfeit, lose (من s.th.) │ انخلع قلبه (qalbuhū) he was completely taken aback, he was alarmed, startled
خلع kal‘ slipping off, taking off (of clothes); deposition (e.g., of a ruler); dislocation, luxation │األسنان خلع extraction of teeth
خلع kul‘ khula, divorce at the instance of the wife, who must pay a compensation (Isl. Law)
خلعة kil‘a pl. خلع kila‘ robe of honor
خليع kalī‘ pl. خلعاء kula‘a’  deposed, dismissed, discharged (from an office); repudiated, disowned; wanton, dissolute, dissipated, profligate, morally depraved
خالع kallā‘ wild, unruly, wanton, shameless, impudent
 خالعة kalā‘a dissoluteness, dissipation, profligacy, wantonness, licentiousness, moral depravity; (tun.) recreation in the country, summer vacation
خولع kaula’ fool, dolt, simpleton 256
خالع kāli‘: العذار خالع k. al-‘idār unrestrained, ;uninhibited, wanton; libertine, debauchee, roué, rake
مخلوع maklū‘ unrestrained, uninhibited, wanton; wild, unruly; reckless, heedless, irresponsible; crazy, mad
خلف kalafa u to be the successor (ه of s.o.), succeed (ه s.o.): to follow (ه s.o.), come after s.o. (ه): to take the place of s.o. (ه), substitute (. for s.o.): to replace (ه s.o., ھ s.th.): to lag behind s.o. (عن): to stay behind (عن after s.o.’s departure); to be detained, be held back, be kept away, stay away (من from) II to appoint as successor ( ه s.o.); to leave behind, leave (ه ,ھ s.o., s.th.); to have descendants, have offspring III to be contradictory, contrary, opposed ( ھ to): to conflict, clash, be at variance (ھ with); to contradict (ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to be different, differ, diverge (ھ from), be inconsistent, incompatible, not in keeping, not to harmonize (ھ with); to offend (ھ against a command, a rule), break, violate, disobey (ھ a command, a rule) IV to leave (ه offspring, children); to compensate, requite, recompense (على s.o.; said of God): to break, fail to keep (وعده wa‘dahū one’s promise), go back on one’s word; to disappoint (الرجاء ar-rajā’a the hopes) V to stay behind; to lag or fall behind (عن); to stay, stay on, remain; to fail to appear or show up; to play truant; to be absent; to stay away (عن from), not go (عن to), not attend (عن s.th.) │المجيء عن تخلف (majī’) to fail to come or arrive; العودة عن تخلف (‘auda) not to return VI to disagree, differ, be at variance; to differ in opinion, be of a different mind VIII to differ, be different, vary (عن from); to be varied, varying, variable, various, diverse, dissimilar; to vary (بين between); to disagree, differ in opinion, be at variance, argue, quarrel, dispute (في about); to come or go frequently (الى to), frequent, patronize (الى a place), visit frequently (الى s.o., s.th.), come and go (الى at); to come, descend ( على upon s.o.; said of afflictions), befall,
overtake (على s.o.) X to appoint as successor or vicar (ه s.o.)
خلف kalf back, rear, rear part or portion; successors; kalfu and خلف من min kalfu (adv.) at the back, in the rear; kalfa (prep.) behind, after, in the rear of │ خلفھا جرى he ran after her: خلف من min kalfi behind, in the rear of; الخلف من from behind, from the rear; الخلف الى to the rear, backward, back; الشيء خلف الى in the wake of s.th.; الخلف في in the rear; at the back, in the background
خلفي kalfī rear, hind, hinder, back
خلف kilf pl. اخالف aklāf test, nipple, mammilla
خلف kulf dissimilarity, disparity, difference, contrast, variance, discrepancy
خلف kalaf pl. اخالف aklāf substitute; successor; descendant, offspring, scion
خلفة kilfa dissimilarity, disparity, difference; that which follows s.th. and replaces it (e.g., second growth of plants, day and night, etc.)
خليفة kalīfa pl. خلفاء kulafā’ , خالئف kalā’if  vicar, deputy; successor; caliph; (formerly) senior official of the native administration in Tunis, assigned to a قائد (formerly) title of the ruler of Spanish Morocco
الخليفية المنطقة al-minṭaqa al-kalīfīya the Caliphate Zone (formerly, designation of Spanish Morocco)
خالفة kilāfa vicarship, deputyship; succession; caliphate, office or rule of a caliph: (formerly) administrative department of a خليفة (Tun.), see above
makālīf  مخاليف pl. miklāf مخالف
province (Yemen) 257
خالف kilāf pl. -āt difference, disparity, dissimilarity; divergence, deviation; contrast, contrariety, incongruity, contradiction, conflict; disagreement, difference of opinion (على or في about); dispute, controversy; kilāfa (prep.) beside, apart from, aside from │خالفه kilāfuhū (= غيره) other, the like, خالفھم others (than those mentioned), وخالفه and the like (after an enumeration); بخالف bi-kilāfi beside, apart 'from, aside from; contrary to, as opposed to, unlike; ل خالفا kilāfan li
 contrary to, against, in contradiction to; ذلك خالف على unlike that, contrary to that, on the contrary, on the other hand
خالفي kilāfī controversial, disputed
مخالفة mukālafa pl. -āt contrast, contrariety; contradiction, inconsistency; contravention, infringement, violation; misdemeanor (jur.; as distinguished from جنحة and جناية); fine (for a misdemeanor)
تخلف takalluf staying away, nonappearance, nonattendance, nonpresence, absence, truancy (also تخلف الحضور عن); staying behind, staying on; stopover (railroad); backwardness
اختالف iktilāf pl. -āt difference, dissimilarity, disparity; diversity, variety; variant, variation; difference of opinion, disagreement; controversy │على الرعية الدينية المذاھب اختالف (ra‘īya, dīnīya) the subjects of every (= irrespective of their) religious denomination; احزابھم اختالف على whichever party they may belong to; الفواكه اختالفھا على all the different fruits, fruits of every kind
مخلوفة maklūfa pl. -āt camel saddle
مخلف mukallaf left, left behind; left over; pl. مخلفات heritage, legacy, estate; scraps, leftovers
مخالف mukālif divergent, varying, different; inconsistent, incompatible, contradictory, contrasting, conflicting; transgressor (of a command)
متخلف mutakallif residual; left over; retarded, backward, underdeveloped (mentally, in growth, etc.); pl. -ūn one left behind; straggler; pl. متخلفات heritage, legacy, estate; leftovers; scraps, refuse, offal │متخلفة اتربة (atriba) waste material, overburden, superstratum (in mining); المياه المتخلفة (miyāh) waste water, sewage
مختلف muktalif different, varying, divergent (من from); varied, various, diverse; having a different opinion, disagreeing (في or على about)
عليه) فيه مختلف) muktalaf fīhi (‘alaihi) controversial, disputed
خلق kalaqa u (kalq) to create, make, originate ( ھ s.th.); to shape, form, mold (ھ s.th.); -- kaliqa a and kaluqa u to be old, worn,
shabby (garment); -- kaluqa u (خالقة kalāqa) to be fit, suitable, suited II to perfume (ھ s.th.) IV to wear out (ھ s.th.), let (ھ s.th.) become old and shabby V pass. of II; to be molded, be shaped (ب by a model or pattern), change (ب with a model); to become angry VIII to invent, contrive, devise (ھ s.th.); to fabricate, concoct, think up (ھ s.th.); to attribute falsely (على ھ to s.o. s.th.)
خلق kalq creation; making; origination; s.th. which is created, a creation; creatures; people, man, mankind; physical constitution
خلق kulq, kuluq pl. اخالق aklāq innate peculiarity; natural disposition, character, temper, nature; -- pl. اخالق aklāq character (of a person); morals; morality │ الخلق سوء sū’ al-k. ill nature; الخلق سيئ sayyi’ al-k. ill- natured; الخلق سھل sahl al-k. complaisant, obliging; الخلق ضيق ḍayyiq al-k. impatient, restless; األخالق علم ‘ilm al-a. ethics; moral science, morals; 258 األخالق سمو sumūw al-
a. nobility of character; األخالق مكارم noble manners, high moral standards; شرطة األخالق šurṭa al-a. vice squad
جرائم خلقية │ moral ethic(al), kulqī خلقي
offenses against public morals
خلق kalaq (m. and f.) pl. خلقان kulqān, اخالق aklāq shabby, threadbare, worn (garment)
خلقة kilqa pl. خلق kilaq creation; innate peculiarity of character, natural disposition, nature; constitution; physiognomy; kilqatan by nature
خلقي kilqī natural, native, congenital, innate, inborn, inbred
خلقة kalaqa rag, tatter
خالق kalāq share (of positive qualities, of religion) │ له خالق ال (kalāqa) disgraceful, ignominious, despicable; a worthless fellow, a good-for-nothing
خليق kalīq pl. خلقاء kulaqā’  fit, qualified, suitable, appropriate (ل ب، for s.th., ان to do s.th.); apt (ان to do s.th.); in keeping with (ب), adequate (ب to), worthy (ب of) │ان خليقون نحن it is (would be) only fair that we ..., we should ..., we ought
to ...; ان خليق ھو he is apt to ..., it is only
 natural for him that he ...; يكون ان بھذا خليق مؤلما (mu’liman) this is apt to be paicful. it is only natural that this is painful; نظرة
بأن تقنعنا ان خليقة يسيرة (tuqni‘anā) no more than a quick glance is apt to convince us that ...
خلوق kalūq of firm character, steadfast, upright
اخلق aklaq more adequate, more appropriate, more natural
خالق kallāq Creator, Maker (God)
خليقة kalīqa the creation, the universe created by God; nature; natural disposition, trait, characteristic; creatures, created beings; pl. خالئق kalā’iq  creatures, created beings
اخالقي aklāqī moral; ethic(al); ethicist, moral philosopher │اخالقي جرم (jurm) offence against public morals; الفلسفة األخالقية (falsafa) moral science, moral philosophy; ethics
أخالقية aklāqīya morality, moral practice
خلقاني kulqānī dealer in old clothes
خالق kāliq creative; Creator, Maker (God)
مخاليق -āt. (pl. created; maklūq مخلوق
makālīq ) creature, created being
مختلق muktaliq inventor, fabricator (of untruths)
مختلق muktalaq fabricated, trumped up, invented, fictitious; apocryphal; pl. -āt lies, falsehoods, fabrications, fictions
خلقين kalqīn pl. خالقين kalāqīn  caldron, boiler, kettle
  خلنج kalanj heath, erica (bot.)
  خلنجان kulungān (eg.) (rhizome of) galingale (Polypodium Calaguala Kz.; bot.)
خلو) خال) kalā u (kulūw, خالء kalā’) to be empty, vacant; -- (kuluw) to be free (من or عن from); to be devoid (من of s.th.), lack, want (من s.th.), be in need (من of); to be vacant (office); -- (خلوة kalwa) to be alone (مع الى، ب، with s.o., الى also: with or in s.th.); to isolate o.s., seclude o.s.; to withdraw, retire (للمداولة li-l-mudāwala for deliberation; court, jury); to withdraw for spiritual communion, in order to take
counsel (الى with); to devote o.s., apply o.s.. give one's attention (ل to s.th.); به خال to forsake, desert s.o., leave s.o. in the lurch; -- to pass (ه s.o.), go by s.o. (ه); to pass, elapse, go by, be bygone, past, over (time) │الجو له خال (jaww) to have free scope. have freedom 259 of action; يخلو ال جمال من (jamāl) it is not without a certain beauty; مبالغة من يخلو ال (mubālaga) it is slightly exaggerated; فائدة من يخلو ال it is not quits useless; نفسه الى خال to be alone with o.s.; to commune with o.s., take counsel with o.s., search one’s heart; سنوات عشر منذ خلت mundu ‘ašri sanawātin kalat for the past ten years II to vacate, evacuate (ھ s.th.); to leave, leave alone (ه s.o.); to release, let go (ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to desist, abstain, refrain (عن from), give up (عن s.th.) │سبيله خلى (sabīlahū) to let s.o. off, let s.o. go, release s.o.; وبين فالن بين خلى الشيء to give s.o. a free hand in, let s.o. have his own way with or in, let s.o. alone with; to open the way for s.o. to; عنك خل الميول ھذه kalli ‘anka h. l-muyūla desist from such desires! IV to empty, void, drain, deplete (ھ من s.th. of); to vacate, leave uninhabited or untenanted (ھ a place); to evacuate (ھ a city) │سبيله اخلى (sabīlahū) to let s.o. off, let s.o. go, release s.o.; ل السبيل اخلى to open the way for ...; طرف اخلى (ṭarafahū) to dismiss, discharge s.o., send s.o. away; to exonerate, exculpate, clear s.o.; ل سمعه اخلى (sam‘ahū) to be all ears for ..., listen intently to ...; يقول ما وبين بينه اخلى to let s.o. say whatever he likes, let s.o. talk freely V to give up, relinquish, forgo, abandon (عن or من s.th.), withdraw, resign (عن or من from); to cede, leave, surrender (عن ل s.th. to s.o.); to lay down (عن an office) VIII to retire, withdraw, step aside, be alone (ب or مع with)
خلو kilw free (من from), devoid (من of)
خلو kulūw emptiness, vacuity; freedom (من from)
خال kalā and خال ما (with foll. acc. or genit.) except, save, with the exception of
خالء kalā’ emptiness, vacuity; empty space, void, vacancy, vacuum; open country │الخالء تحت or الخالء في under the open sky, outdoors, in the open air; بيت الخالء bait al-k. toilet, water closet
 خلوة kalwa pl. kalawāt privacy, solitude; seclusion, isolation, retirement; place of retirement or seclusion, retreat, recess; secluded room; hermitage; religious assembly hall of the Druses; booth, cabin │خلوة على alone; in retirement, in seclusion; الحمام خلوة k. al- ḥammām bathhouse
خلوي kalawī lonely, solitary, secluded, isolated, outlying; located in the open country, rural, rustic, country │خلوي بيت (bait) country house
خلى kalīy pl. اخلياء akliyā’  free (من from), void, devoid (من of) │البال خلى carefree, easygoing, happy-go-lucky
خلية kalīya pl. خاليا kalāyā beehive; cell (biol.) │األولى الحيوية الخلية (al-ḥayawīya l- ūlā) protoplasm; خاليا من from within ..., from inside ..., out of ...
مخالة miklāh nosebag
تخلية takliya vacating, evaluation
اخالء iklā’ emptying, voiding, draining; clearing; vacating, evacuation │سبيله اخالء
i. sabīlihī; his release
تخل takallin relinquishment, abandonment, surrender, renunciation, resignation (عن of s.th.)
اختالء iktilā’ privacy, solitude
خال kālin empty, void; open, vacant (office, position); free, unrestrained, untrammeled, unencumbered; free (من from), devoid (من of) │in numerous compounds corresponding to Engl. -less or un-, e.g., الفائدة من خال useless, السكان من خال (sukkān) uninhabited, untenanted, unoccupied; خالي الدين kālī d-dain not bound by, without obligation to, free (من from); البال خالى carefree, easygoing, happy-go-lucky; -- (pl. خوال kawālin) 260 past, bygone (time)
في االيام centuries; past the القرون الخالية│ past days the in l-kawālī l-ayyāmi fī الخوالي
خم kamma u (kamm) to sweep (ھ a room); -- i u (kamm, خموم kumūm) to exude a rotten, foul smell; to rot, putrefy, decay
خم kumm pl. اخمام akmām coop, chicken coop, brooder; poultry pen
خمة kamma putrid smell, stench
خام kāmm stinking, rotten, putrid, foul- smelling; kām look up alphabetically
مخم mukimm stinking, rotten, putrid, foul-smelling
خمج kamija a (kamaj) to spoil, rot, decay
خمد kamada u (خمود kumūd) to go out, die (fire); to abate, subside, let up, calm down, cease, die down IV to extinguish, put out (ھ fire); to calm, appease, placate, soothe, lull, still, quiet (ھ s.th.); to suppress, quell (ھ s.th.); to subdue, soften, deaden, dull (ھ s.th.); to stifle, smother, kill (ھ s.th.; fig.)
خمود kumūd extinction; decline, degeneration, deterioration; quietness, stillness, tranquility, calm; immobility, motionlessness
اخماد ikmād extinction, putting out; calming, soothing, placation, appeasement, lulling, stilling; subduing, softening, dulling; settlement; suppression, quelling (of a riot)
خامد kāmid dying; abating, subsiding; calm, tranquil, still, quiet
خمر kamara u (kamr) and II to cover, hide, conceal (٨ ھ.th.); to leaven, raise (ھ dough); to ferment (ھ s.th.), cause fermentation (ھ in) III to permeate, pervade (ھ s.th.), mix, blend (ھ with); to possess, seize, overcome (ه s.o., e.g., an idea, a feeling) IV to leaven, raise (ھ dough); to ferment (ھ s.th.), cause fermentation (ھ in); to harbor, entertain (ھ s.th.); to bear a grudge, feel resentment (ل against s.o.) V to ferment, be in a state of fermentation; to rise (dough); to veil the head and face (woman) VI to conspire, plot, collude, scheme, intrigue (على against) VIII to ferment, be in a state of fermentation; to rise (dough); to become ripe, ripen (also fig.: an idea in s.o.’s mind)
خمر kamr m. and f., pl. خمور kumūr
wine; pl. alcoholic beverages, liquor
خمرة kamra wine
خمري kamrī golden brown, reddish brown, bronze-colored (actually, wine- colored)
 خمرية kamrīya pl. -āt wine poem, bacchanalian verse
kumur خمر akmira, اخمرة pl. /fimar خمار
veil covering head and face of a woman
خمار kumār aftereffect of intoxication, hang-over
خمير kamīr leavened (dough); ripe, mature, mellow; leaven; leavened bread
خميرة kamīra pl. خمائر kamā’ir  leaven; ferment; barm, yeast; enzyme (chem.); (fig.) starter, nucleus, basis (from which s.th. greater develops)
خمار kammār wine merchant, keeper of a wineshop
خمارة kammāra wineshop, tavern
خمير kimmīr winebibber, drunkard, tippler, sot
تخمير takmīr leavening, raising (of dough); fermenting, fermentation
اختمار iktimār (process of) fermentation
مخمور makmūr drunk, intoxicated, inebriated
مختمر muktamir fermenting, fermented; alcoholic 261
خمس II to quintuple, make fivefold, multiply by five (ھ s.th.); to make pentagonal (ھ s.th.); to divide into five parts (ھ s.th.)
خمس kums pl. خمس akmās one fifth │ اسداسه في اخماسه ضرب ḍaraba akmāsahū fī asdāsihī and ألسداس اخماسا ضرب (li- asdāsin) to rack one’s brain in search of a way out; to be at one’s wit’s end; to scheme, intrigue
خمسة kamsa (f. خمس kams) five
خمس عشرة (f. ‘ašara kamsata خمسة عشر
kamsa ‘ašrata) fifteen
al- ‘īd عيد الخمسين │ fifty kamsūn خمسون
k. Whitsuntide, Pentecost; الخمسين احد aḥad al-k. Whitsunday; الخمسين أيام ayyām al- kamsīn the period of about 50 days between Easter and Whitsuntide; □ خمسين and خماسين khamsin, a hot southerly wind in Egypt
خمسين عيد ‘īd kamsīn 50th anniversary
al-k. yaum يوم الخميس and kamīs خميس Corpus al-jasad k. خميس الجسد│ Thursday al-fiṣḥ, k. خميس الفصح (Chr.); Day Christi k. خميس العھد and al-asrār, k. خميس األسرار (Chr.) Thursday Maundy al-‘ahd
خماس kammās pl. خماسة kamāmisa (magr.) sharecropper receiving one fifth of the crop as wages
خماسي kumāsī fivefold, quintuple; consisting of five consonants (gram.) │ خماسي (zawāyā) pentagonal, five-cornered
خميسة kumaisa (mor. Pronounced kmīsa) ornament in the shape of a hand (worn by women and children as a talisman against the evil eye)
الخامس al-kāmis the fifth
مخمس mukammas pentagonal, five- cornered; pentagon; fivefold, quintuple; O pentameter
خمش kamaša i u (kamš) and II to scratch (ھ e.g., the face, the skin, with the nails)
خمش kamš pl. خموش kumūš scratch, scratch mark, scar
خماشة kumāša pl. -āt scratch, scar
خمص kamaṣa u and kamiṣa a to be empty, hungry (stomach)
خميص kamīs البطن خميص k. al-baṭn, الحشا خميص k. al-ḥašā with an empty stomach, hungry
akāmiṣ  اخامص pl. al-qadam akmaṣ اخمص القدم من الرأس │ foot) the (of sale the of hollow toe to head from الى اخمص القدم
خمع kama‘a a (kam‘, خموع kumū‘) to limp, walk with a limp
خمل kamala u (خمول kumūl) to be unknown, obscure, undistinguished; to be weak, languid
خمل kami and خملة kamla nap, the rough, hairy surface of a fabric; fibers
خمل kamil languid, sluggish, dull, listless
خمول kumūl obscurity; weakness lassitude, languor, lethargy; indolence, sluggishness, inactivity; apathy, indifference; sleepiness, drowsiness
 خميلة kamīla pl. خمائل kamā’il  place with luxuriant tree growth; thicket, brush, scrub
خامل kāmil unknown, obscure, undistinguished, unimportant, minor; weak, languid, sluggish
مخمل mukmal velvet-like fabric, velvet
مخملي mukmalī velvety │مخملي جلد (jild) deerskin, buckskin
خمن II to guess, conjecture, surmise; to make conjectures (ھ as to); to assess, appraise, estimate (ھ s.th.) 262
تخمين takmīn appraisal, assessment, estimation; تخمينا takmīnan and تخمين على approximately, roughly
خمن mukammin appraiser, assessor
  خنkanna i (خنين kanīn) to speak nasally, nasalize; to twang, speak through the nose
خنة kunna nasal twang
خنين kanīn twanging, nasal twang
اخن akann , f. خناء kanna’  twanging, speaking through the nose
 خن kunn (= خم kumm) pl. اخنان aknān coop. chicken coop, brooder
خنث kanita a to be soft, effeminate V to display effeminate manners, become or be effeminate
خنث kanit oft, effeminate
kanatā خناثى kināt, خناث pl. kuntā خنثى
hermaphrodite
خنوثة kunūta effeminacy
تخنث takannut effeminacy
مخنث mukannat bisexual; effeminate; powerless, impotent, weak
خنجر kanjar pl. خناجر kanājir  dagger
خنخن kankana to nasalize, speak, nasally; to twang, speak through the nose
خندق kandaqa to dig a ditch or trench (خندقا); to take up positions, prepare for battle
خندق kandaq pl. خنادق kanādiq  ditch; trench
خنزوانية kunzuwānīya megalomania
خنزب kanzab Satan, Devil
خنزير kinzīr pl. خنازير kanāzir  swine, pig, hog; بري خنزير (barrī) wild hoar; خنازير scrofula, scrofulosis (med.)
sow kinzīra خنزيرة
خنازيري kanāzīrī scrofulous
الخناس al-kannās epithet of the Devil (properly speaking, he who withdraw, when the name of God is mentioned)
خنس pl. kansā’ , خنساء f. aknas اخنس
kuns pug-nosed
خنشار kinšār fern (bot.)
خنوص kinnauṣ pl. خنانيص kanānīṣ  piglet
خنصر kinṣir pl. خناصر kanāṣir  little finger │ على (الخناصر) الخنصر عقد to give s.th. top- rating because of its excellence, put s.th. above everything else
خنع kana‘a a (خنوع kunū‘) to yield, surrender, bow, stoop (ل or الى to s.o.). humble o.s., cringe (ل or الى before s.o.)
خنوع kanū‘ submissive, servile, meek, humble; treacherous, perfidious, disloyal
خنوع kunū‘ submissiveness, meekness, servility
خنف kanaf (eg.) twanging, nasal twang
خنفر kanfara to snuffle, snort
خنافس pl. kunfusā’  خنفساء and kunfus خنفس
kanāfis  dung beetle, scarab
خنق kanaqa u (kanq) to choke (ه s.o.); to suffocate, stifle, smother, strangle, throttle, choke to death (ه s.o.); to throttle down (techn.; ھ s.th.); to slow down, cut, check, suppress (ھ s.th.) III to quarrel, have a fight (ه with s.o.) VI to quarrel, dispute, have a fight (مع with s.o.) VII pass. of I; VIII to he throttled, be suppressed; to be tight, constricted (throat); to be strangled, be choked to death
خنق kanq strangling, strangulation; throttling, suppression │ األنوار خنقk. al-anwāar dim- out
اليد خنقة kanqat (kunqat) al-yad wrist
خناق kunāq suffocation; angina (med.); kunāq and خانوق kānūq quinsy, diphtheria 263 (med.); pl. خوانق kawāniq  and خوانيق kawānīq  do.
 خناق kannāq choking, throttling, strangling
grab to أخذه بمخنقه│ throat neck, maknaq مخنق
s.o. by the throat, bear down on s.o.; to have power over s.o.
خناق kināq strangling cord; neck, throat │ضيق على الخناق (ḍayyaqa) to tighten the grip around s.o.’s throat, tread on s.o.’s neck, oppress s.o., beset s.o. grievously; بخناقه أخذ to grab s.o. by the throat
خناق kināq and خناقة kināqa quarrel, fight, row
اختناق iktināq suffocation, asphyxiation; constriction; asphyxia (med.)
خانق kāniq choking, strangling; suffocating, asphyxiating, stifling, smothering; throttling, throttle· (in compounds; tech.); (pl. خوانق kawāniq ) choke coil, reactor (radio); gorge, ravine, canyon │ خانق غاز asphyxiating gas;
الذئب خانق k. ad-di’b wolfsbane, monkshood, aconite (bot.)
مخنوق maknūq strangled; suffocated, stifled, smothered; suppressed, choking (voice, laughter, etc.); constricted; strangulated; throttled
مختنق muktaniq crammed, jammed, crowded, chock-full (ب with)
(خنو and خنا (خنى kanā u, خني kaniya a (خنى kanan) to use obscene language IV to hit hard, afflict grievously, wear down, ruin, destroy, crush (على s.o., s.th.; said of fate)
خنى kanan obscene language; s.th. indecent or obscene; prostitution; fornication
خواجة kawāja pl. -āt sir, Mr. (title and form of address, esp., for Christians and Westerners, used with or without the name of the person so addressed)
خوان kuwān, kiwān pl. اخونة akwina, اخاوين akāwīn  table │الزينة خوان k. az-zīna dressing table
خوجة kōga (eg.) teacher, schoolmaster
خوخ II (eg.) to rot, decay, spoil
خوخ kauk (coll.; n. un. ة) peach (eg.); plum (syr.)
خوخة kauka pl. kuwak skylight, windowlike opening; wicket (of a canal
lock, of a gate); (eg.) alley connecting two streets
خوذة kūda pl. -āt, خوذ kuwad helmet 1خور) خار) kāra (خوار kuwār) to low, moo
(cattle); -- خور kawira a (خور kawar) and خار kāra u to decline in force or vigor; to grow weak, spiritless, languid, to languish, flag; to dwindle, give out (strength)
kīrān خيران akwār, اخوار pl. kaur خور bay inlet,
خور kawar weakness, fatigue, enervation, languor, lassitude
خوار kuwār lowing, mooing
خوار kawwār weak, languid, strengthless
 خوري kūrī pl. خورنة kawārina parson, curate, priest; see also under خير
خورس kūrus choir (of a church)
خوزق kauzaqa to impale (ه s.o.); to comer, drive into a comer, get into a bad fix (ه s.o.)
خزق see خازوق
خوشق ورق waraq kaušaq wrapping paper; blotting paper
 خوص kūṣ (coll.; n. un. ة) palm leaves
خوصة kūṣa (eg.) plaitwork of palm leaves (resembling that of Panama hats; used as a tarboosh lining)
خواصة kiwwāṣa art of palm-leaf plaiting 264
خوص see اخوص and kawaṣ خوص 
خص see خويصة 
 خوض) خاض) kā<ḍ < u (kauḍ, خياض kiyāḍ) to wade (ھ into water); to plunge, dive, rush (ھ into s.th.), tackle courageously (ھ s.th.), embark boldly (ھ on); to penetrate ( ھ or في into), become absorbed, engrossed (ھ or في in); to go into a subject (في), take up (ھ في subject), deal (في with) │خاض المعركة (ma‘raka) to rush into battle; خاض الحرب غمار (gimāra l-ḥarb) to enter the war
خوض kawḍ, plunge, rush (into); entering, entry (into, e.g., into war, into negotiations); penetration; search (في
 into), examination, discussion, treatment (
في of a subject)
مخاضة makāḍa pl. -āt, مخاوض makāwiḍ 
ford
مخض see مخاض 
خوف) خاف) kāfa (1  pers. perf. kiftu) a (kauf, مخافة makāata, خيفة kīfata) to be frightened, scared; to be afraid (ه ھ، or من. of), dread ( ه ھ، or من s.o. or s.th.); to fear (ه ھ، or من s.o., s.th.; على for s.o., for s.th.; ان that) II and IV to frighten, scare, alarm, fill with fear (ه s.o.) V = I
خوف kauf fear, dread (من of); خوفا
kaufan for fear (من of), fearing (على for)
خيفة kīfa fear, dread (من of)
خواف kawwāf, خويف kawīf fainthearted, fearful, timid, timorous; coward, poltroon
اخوف akwaf  more timorous; more dreadful, more to be feared
مخافة ان│ dread fear, makāfa مخافة
(makāfatan) for fear that ..., afraid that ...
مخاوف makāwif  (pl. zu مخافة) fears, apprehensions, anxieties; horrors, dangers, perils
تخويف takwīf and اخافة ikāfa intimidation, bullying, cowing, frightening, scaring
تخوف takawwuf fear, dread
خائف kā’if pl. خوف kuwwaf fearful, timid, timorous; scared, frightened, alarmed (من by); afraid (من of); anxious ( على about), apprehensive (على for)
مخوف makūf feared, dreaded; dangerous, perilous
مخيف mukīf fear-inspiring, frightful, dreadful, terrible, horrible
خاكى look up alphabetically
خول II to grant, accord, give, concede (ه ھ to
s.o. s.th., also ل ھ; esp., the right, the power to do s.th.), bestow, confer (ه ھ upon s.o. s.th., also ل ھ), vest, endow (ه ھ
s.o. with s.th., also. ل)
خال kāl pl. اخوال akwāl, خؤول ku’ūl, خولة ku’ūla (maternal) uncle; -- (pl. خيالن kīlān) mole, birthmark (on the face);
O patch, beauty spot
خالة kāla pl. -āt (maternal) aunt
خول kawal chattels, property, esp., that consisting in livestock and slaves; servants; (eg.) dancer; effeminate person, sissy
خولى kaulī supervisor, overseer (of a plantation); gardener
خؤولة ku’ūla relationship of the maternal uncle
مخول mukawwal authorized (ب to)
خام look up alphabetically
 خون) خان) kana u (kaun, خيانة kiyāna) to be disloyal, faithless, false, treacherous, perfidious, act disloyally, treacherously, perfidiously (ه toward s.o.); to betray (ه s.o.); to cheat, dupe, gull, hoodwink (ه s.o.), impose (ه upon), deceive (زوجته one’s wife); to fool, deceive, mislead 265 (ه s.o.; said, e.g., of the memory); to forsake, let down, desert (ه s.o.); to fail (ه s.o.; e.g., the voice, and the like); to fail to keep (ھ e.g., a promise), break (عھدا ‘ahdan a contract) II to regard as or call faithless, false, disloyal, treacherous, dishonest, unreliable (ه s.o.); to distrust, mistrust (ه s.o.) V to impair, harm, hurt, prejudice (ھ s.th.) VIII to dupe, gull, cheat, deceive, double-cross, betray (ه s.o.) X استخون istakwana to distrust, mistrust (ه s.o.)
خيانة kiyāna faithlessness, falseness, disloyalty, treachery, perfidy; breach of faith, betrayal; treason; deception, fooling
faith; of breach al-amāna k. خيانة األمانة│ خيانة الوعود treason; high (‘uẓmā) خيانة عظمى promise of breach
خؤون ka’ūn faithless, false, disloyal, traitorous, treacherous, perfidious; unreliable, tricky, deceptive
خوان kawwān unreliable, faithless, disloyal, treacherous, perfidious; traitor
خائن kā’in pl. خوان kuwwān, خونة kawana disloyal, faithless, false, unreliable, traitorous, treacherous, perfidious; traitor
 خان and خانة look up alphabetically
 خوان look up alphabetically
  خوي kawā i (خواء kawā’, خوى kawan) to be empty, be hungry; -- kawiya a (خواء kawā’) to be empty, bare, dreary, desolate, waste
kawan خوى and kawā’ خواء
emptinessv(of the stomach), hunger
خاو kāwin empty, vacant; dreary, waste, desolate │عروشه على خاو (‘urūšihī) completely devastated; الوفاض خاوى k. l- wifāḍ (= الوفاض خالى) with an empty pouch, empty-handed, without a catch
خوى III to join (ه s.o.), join the company of (ه), accompany (ه s.o.)
خوي kuwaiy little brother
خوة kuwa brotherliness, fraternity (=
ukūwa) اخوة
مخاو mukāwin brotherly, fraternal
خيار شنير │ cucumber )ة un. n. (coll.; kiyār خيار
k. šanbar (eg.) drumstick tree, purging cassia (Cassia fistula; bot.); قشة خيار k. qašša (eg.) gherkins, pickles
خيب) خاب) kāba i (خيبة kaiba) to fail, miscarry, be without success, be unsuccessful; to be frustrated, be dashed, be disappointed (hopes); to go wrong II and IV to cause to fail; to thwart, frustrate, fail, defeat (ھ s.th.); to disappoint, dash (أماله āmālahū s.o.’s hopes) V = I
خيبة kaiba failure, miscarriage, defeat, frustration; fizzle, flop; disappointment │ خيبة ولد walad k., f. خيبة بنت bint k. (eg.) a good-for-nothing, a ne’er-do-well
خائب kā’ib failing; abortive, unsuccessful; disappointed
خير) خار) kāra i to choose, make one’s choice; to prefer (ھ على s.th. to) II to make or let (ه s.o.) choose (بين between, في from), give (ه s.o.) the alternative, option or choice (بين between, في in); to prefer (ھ على s.th. to) III to vie, compete (ه with s.o.); to make or let (ه s.o.) choose, give (ه s.o.) the choice, option or alternative V to choose, select, pick (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) VIII to choose, make one’s choice; to choose, select, elect, pick (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), fix upon s.o. or s.th. (ھ، ه); to prefer (ھ على s.th. to) │الى ﷲ اختار جواره ... (jiwārihī) approx.: the Lord has taken ... unto Himself X to seek or request what is good or best (ھ) for o.s. (ه from
s.o.); to consult an oracle, cast lots │استخار في ﷲ to ask God for proper guidance in
خير kair pl. خيار kiyār, اخيار akyār good; excellent, outstanding, superior, admirable; better; best; - (pl. ٦٦٢ خيور kuyūr) good thing, blessing; wealth, property; -- good, benefit, interest, advantage; welfare; charity │الناس خير the best of all people; الناس اخيار الناس، خيار the beat people, the pick of the human race; ھو منك خير he ill better than you; لك خير ھو it is better for you; الخير كل الخير the very best; العام الخير (‘āmm) the commonweal, general welfare; العام الخير دولة welfare state; لخير    for the benefit of; انفسھم لخير li-k. anfusihim for their own good; الخير اعمال charitable deeds; الخير صباح ṣabāḥ al-k. and صباحك بالخير good morning! بالخير ذكره (dakarahū) to retain a good impression. of s.o.; to speak well of s.o.
خيري kairī charitable, beneficent, benevolent, philanthropic │خيرية جمعية (jam‘īya) charitable organization
خيرية kairīya charity, charitableness, benevolence, beneficence
خير kayyir generous, liberal, openhanded, munificent; charitable, beneficent, benevolent; benign, gracious, kind
خيرة kaira pl. -āt good deed, good thing; pl. خيرات resources, treasures (e.g., of the earth, of a country), boons, blessings
خيرة kīra and kiyara the best, choice, prime, flower, pick, elite
خيري kīrī gillyflower (bot.)
pl. kūrā خورى kīrā, خيرى f.  , akyar اخير
اخاير akāyir  better, superior
خيار kiyār choice; option, exercise of the power of choice (Isl. Law); refusal, right of withdrawal (Isl. Law); the best, choice, prime, flower, pick, elite; see also alphabetically
خياري kiyārī optional, facultative; voluntary
اختيار iktiyār choice; election (also pol.; pl. -āt); selection; preference ( علىto); option; free will (philos.); اختيارا iktiyāran
 of one’s own accord, spontaneously, voluntarily
اختياري iktiyārī voluntary, facultative, elective (studies)
مخير mukayyar having the choice or option
مختار muktār free to choose, having the choice or option (في in), volunteering, مختارا muktāran (adv.) voluntarily, spontaneously, of one’s own accord; choice, select, exquisite; chosen, preferred, favorite; a favorite; مختارات selection, selected writings, anthology; (pl. مخاتير makātīr ) village chief, mayor of a village (šyr., Leb., Ir.)
خزر see خيزران
خيس) خاس) kāsa i (خيس kais, خيسان kayasān) to break (ب an agreement, a promise)
خيش kaiš sackcloth, sacking, canvas
خيش kaiš place of sackcloth; (pl. -āt,
خيش kiyaš) sack; straw mattress, pallet;
Bedouin tent
خشم see خيشوم
خيط) خاط) kāṭa i (kaiṭ) and II to sew, stitch (ھ s.th.)
خيط kaiṭ pl. خيوط kuyūṭ, اخياط akyāṭ, خيطان kīṭān thread; twine cord; pack- thread, string; fiber │امل خيط k. amal a spark of hope, a thread of hope
خيطي kaiṭī threadlike; fibrous
خياط kiyāṭ needle
خياط kiyāṭa swing; needlework, tailoring, dressmaking │الخياطة آلة sewing machine
خياط kayyāṭ pl. -ūn tailor
خياطة kayyāṭa pl. -āt dressmaker; seam- stress
مخيط mikyaṭ needle
خائط kā’iṭ tailor 267
 خيل) خال) k <ā<l   << to imagine, fancy, think, believe, suppose (ان that); to consider, deem, think (ه ه s.o. to be …, ھ ھ s.th. to be ...), regard (ه ه s.o. as, ھ ھ s.th. as) II to make (الى s.o.) believe (ان that), suggest ( الى to s.o., ھ s.th.), give s.o. (الى) the
impression that (ان (له) اليه خيل│ (ھ (kuyyila) he imagined, fancied, thought that it seemed, it appeared to him that …; خيلت مل على (kayyalat; النفس being understood) as the heart dictates, i.e., as chance will have it, at random, unhesitatingly IV to be dubious, doubtful, uncertain, intricate V to imagine, fancy (ھ s.th.); to present itself, reveal itself (ل to s.o.’s mind), become the object of imagination. appear (= II kuyyila; ل to s.o.) │الخير فيه تخيل (kaira) to suspect good qualities in s.o., have an inkling of s.o.’s good qualities, think well of s.o., have ھ good opinion of s.o. VI to pretend (ل ب to
s.o. s.th., that ...), act (ل toward s.o., ب as if); to feel self-important, be conceited; to behave in pompous manner, swagger, strut about; to conceive eccentric ideas, get all kinds of fantastic notions, have ھ bee in one’s bonnet; to appear dimly, in shadowy outlines; to appear, show (على on), hover (على about; e.g., ھ smile about s.o.’s lips) flit (على across, e.g., ھ shadow across s.o.’s face, etc.) VIII to feel self- important, be conceited; to behave in ھ pompous manner, swagger, strut about
خيال kayāl pl. اخيلة akyi<l < disembodied spirit, ghost, specter; imagination; phantom, apparition; phantasm, fantasy, chimera, vision; shadow, trace, dim reflection │الشك خيال k. ašakk slightest doubt; الصحراء خيال k. aṣ-ṣaḥrā’ scarecrow; الظل خيال k. aẓ-ẓill shadow play
خيالة kayā<l < pl. -āt ghost, spirit, specter; phantom; phantasm, fantasy, chimera
خيالي kayālī imaginary, unreal; ideal, ideational, conceptual; utopian
اخيل akyal  more conceited, haughtier, prouder
اخيل akyal pl. خيل kīl, اخايل akāyil  green woodpecker
خيالء kuyalā’  (f.) conceit, conceitedness, haughtiness, pride; الخيالء al-kuyalā<’ < haughtily, proudly
خيلولة kailū<l < conceit, conceitedness, snobbery, arrogance, haughtiness
مخيلة makī<l < conceit, conceitedness, snobbery, arrogance, haughtiness; (pl.
 مخايل makāyil ) indication, sign, symptom, characteristic; pl. مخايل visions, mental images, imagery
تخييل takyīl playacting │التخييل فن fann at-t. dramatic art
تخيل takayyul pl. -āt imagination, phantasy; delusion, hallucination, fancy, whim, fantastic notion
تخيلي takayyulī fantastic, fanciful, imaginary
اختيال iktiyāl pride; arrogance, haughtiness
مخيلة mukayyi<l < imagination, phantasy
مخيل mukīl dubious, doubtful, uncertain, intricate, tangled, confused; confusing, bewildering
مختال muktāl conceited, haughty, arrogant
 خيل II to gallop (on horseback)
خيل kail (coll.) pl. خيول kuyūl horses; horsepower, H.P. │الخيل سباق horse racing, horse race
خيال kayyāl pl. ة, -ūn horseman, rider خيالة kayyā<l < cavalry (Ir.; Eg. 1939) خيالة سرية sarī<y < kayyā<l < cavalry
squadron (Eg. 1939) 268
خول see خال 
 خيم II to pitch one’s tent, to camp; to settle down; to stay, linger, rest, lie down, lie ( على on, فى or ب at ھ place); (fig.) to reign (e.g., calm, silence, peace, etc.; فى or ب at, in), settle (على over) V to pitch one’s tent; to camp
خيمة ḳaim<< pl. -āt, خيام ḳiyām, خيم ḳiyam tent; tarpaulin; arbor, bower; pavilion
خيم ḳayyām tentmaker
خيم muḳayyam pl. -āt camping ground, camp, encampment
 خيم ḳīm natural disposition, nature, temper, character; inclination, bent, tendency│اخذ خيمه (eg.) to fool s.o.’s pulse, sound s.o. out
 خام look up alphabetically
□ خية ḳayya pl. -āt noose

د
دأب da’aba a (da’b, da’b, دؤوب du’ūb) to persist, persevere, be indefatigable, untiring, tireless (فى or على in s.th.); to go in for s.th. (على), apply o.s., devote o.s. ( على to), practice eagerly (على s.th.)
دأب da’b pl. ادؤب ad’ub habit
دأب da’b, da’ab and دؤوب du’ūb persistence, perseverance, tirelessness, indefatigability, assiduity, eagerness
دئب da’ib and دائب dā’ib addicted, devoted, persistent, assiduous, eager, indefatigable, untiring, tireless (على in)
دؤوب da’ūb untiring, tireless, indefatigable, persevering, persistent
ادأب ad’ab  more persistent, more assiduous
دادة dāda governess, dry nurse, nurse
داغ dāg pl. -āt brand (made on cattle, etc.)
دال dāl name of the letter د داليا dāliyā dahlia(s) (bot.)
ad-d. lauḥat لوحة الداما checkers│ dāmā داما
checkerboard
دمجانة see دامجانة
دانتيال (Fr. dentelle) dantilla lace
دانق dānaq, dāniq pl. دوانق dawāniq  an ancient coin. = 1/4 dirham; small coin; a square measure (Eg.; = 4 sahm = 29.17 m )
دانمارك dannmark Denmark
Danish danmarkī دانماركى
الداننوب ad-dānūb the Danube
داية dāya pl. -āt wet nrse; midwife
دب dabba i (dabb, دبيب dabīb) to creep, crawl (reptile); to proceed, advance, or move slowly; to go on all fours; to enter (فى s.th.), come (فى into); to steal, creep (فى نفسه into s.o.’s heart; of a feeling, e.g., doubt); to spread (فى over, in, through), fill, pervade, invade (فى s.th.) ; to gain ground; to gain ascendancy (فى in s.o.; of a condition, an idea, a sensation); to stream in, ruah in (of sensations, فى upon
 s.o.)│ الحياة دبيب فيه دب (d. al-ḥayāh) to gain vitality II to sharpen, point, taper (ھ s.th.)
دب dubb pl. ادباب adbāb, دببة dibaba bear│ االصغر الدب(aṣgar) Little Bear, Ursa Minor (astron.); االكبر الدب (akbar) Great Bear, Ursa Major (astron.) 269
دبي dubbī ursine
دبة dabba sand hill, mound
دبيب dabīb creeping, crawling; infiltration; influx, inflow, flow (e.g., of sensations, of life, of vigor); reptile
دباب dabbāb creeping, crawling, repent, reptant
دبابة dabbāba pl. -āt tank, armored car
مدب midabb: مصبه الى النيل مدب من (maṣabbihī) from the lower Nile to its mouth
دابة dābba pl. دواب dawābb  animal, beast; riding animal (horse, mule, donkey)
دويبة duwaibba tiny animal, animalcule; insect
مدببmudabbab pointed, tapered
دبج II to embellish, decorate, adorn, ornament ( ھ s.th.); to put in good style, formulate, compose, write down, put down in writing (ھ s.th.)
ديباج dībāj pl. دبابيج dabābīj  silk brocade
ديباجة dībāja (n. un. of ديباج) brocade; introductory verses or lines, proem, preamble; face, visage; style, elegance of style; renown, repute, standing, prestige
تدبيج tadbīj embellishment, adornment, ornamentation; composition, writing (of a book)
مدبجات mudabbajāt embellishments of speech, fine figures of speech
دبدب dabdaba to tread, tap
دبدبة dabdaba sound of footsteps, footfall, pitapat; pattering or clattering noise; snapping, flapping noise
دبدوبة dabdūba pl. دباديب dabādīb  point, tip, tapered end
 دبر dabara u (دبور dubūr) to turn one’s back; to elapse, pass, go by (time) II to make
arrangements, make plans (ھ for), prepare, plan, organize, design, frame, devise, concert, arrange, get up, bring about (ھ s.th.); to hatch (ھ a plot, etc.); to contrive, work up (ھ a ruse); to direct, conduct, manage, run, engineer, steer, marshal, regulate (ھ s.th.), be in charge (ھ of); to manage well, economize (ھ s.th.) │ خطة دبر (kiṭṭatan) to devise a plan; دبر الشؤون to conduct the course of business, be in charge IV to turn one’s back (عن or على on s.o.); to flee, run away; to escape, dodge; to slip away V to be prepared, planned, organized, managed; to reflect, ponder (في or ھ on); to consider, weigh, contemplate (في or ھ s.th.); to treat or handle with care, with circumspection (في s.th.) VI to face in opposite directions, stand back to back; to be contrary, opposite, opposed; to be inconsistent, incompatible X to turn the back (ه on s.o.)
دبر dubr, dubur pl. ادبار adbār rump backside, buttocks, posteriors; rear part, Rear, hindpart; back; last part, end, tail │ دبر منbehind, at the back, in the rear; from behind, from the rear; دبره ولى wallā duburahū to turn one’s back; to flee, run away
دبري dabarī trailing behind, belated, late
دبرة dabra turn (of fate)
دبور dabūr west wind
دبور dabbūr pl. -āt dabābīr  hornet; wasp
تدبير tadbīr pl. -āt planning, organization; direction, management, disposal, regulation; economy, economization; -- (pl. تدابير tadābīr ) measure, move, step │ المنزل تدبير t. al- manzil housekeeping, household management; منزلي تدبير (manzilī) do.; قام الالزمة بالتدابير and الالزمة التدابير اتخذ (ittakada,qāma) to take the necessary measures
ادبار idbār flight, retreat
تدبر tadabbur reflection, meditation (في on), thinking (في about); consideration, contemplation (في of)
 تدابر taddbur disparity, dissimilarity, contrast
دابر dābir past, bygone (time); the ultimate, utmost, extremity. end; root │ الشيء دابر قطع (dābira š-šai’) to eradicate, root out s.th., suppress s.th. radically; الدابر باألمس (amsi) sometime in the past;
الدابر كأمس ذھب (ka-amsi d-dābiri) to vanish into thin air, disappear without leaving a trace (actually: like yesterday gone by)
مدبر mudabbir manager, director; ruler, disposer; leader; ringleader │المكائد مدبر schemer, intriguer, intrigant
مدبر mudbir: ومقبال مدبرا mudbiran wa- muqbilan from the rear and from in front
 دبارة dubāra (=دوبارة ) packthread, string, twine, cord, rope j thread
 دبس dibs sirup, molasses, treacle, esp. of grapes
 دبوس dabbūs pl. دبابيس dabābīs  pin; safety pin
pin safety دبوس انكليزي│
دبش dabaš junk, rubbish, trash; -- dabš rubblestone, rubble; crushed rock (used as substratum in macadamizing)
دبغ dabaga a i u (dabg) to tan (ھ a hide) دباغة dibāga tanning, tanner’s trade دباغ dabbāg tanner
  madābig مدابغ pl. madbaga مدبغة
tannery
دبق dabiqa a (dabaq) to stick, adhere (ب to); to cleave, cling (ب to) II to catch with birdlime (ھ a bird)
دبق dibq birdlime
دبق dabiq sticky, gluey, limy
دبك dabaka u (dabk) to stamp the feet; to dance the dabka (see below)
دبكة dabka (syr.) a group dance in which the dancers, lined up with looked arms or holding hands, stamp out the rhythm and sing
دبلة dibla pl. دبل dibal ring
دبلوم diblōm and دبلومة diblōma pl. -āt diploma
دبلوماسي diblōmāsī diplomatic; diplomat
دبلوماسية diblōmāsīya diplomacy
دثر datara u (دثور dutūr) to fall into oblivion, be forgotten, become obsolete, antiquated, extinct; to be blotted out, wiped out, effaced, obliterated (track by the wind) II to cover, envelop (ه s.o.); to destroy, annihilate (ھ s.th.) V to wrap o.s. (في in), cover o.s. (في with) VII to be or become wiped out, blotted out, effaced, obliterated; to be old; to be forgotten, have fallen into oblivion, be obsolete VIII iddatara to wrap o.s. (ب in), cover o.s. (ب with)
دثار ditār pl. دثر dutur blanket, cover
مدثور madtūr past, bygone, ancient (time)
دج dajja i (dajj, دجيج dajīj) to walk slowly II
teeth the to s.o. arm to دججه بالسالح
دج dujj (syr.) thrush (zool.)
دجة dujja intense darkness, pitch- darkness
دجاج dajāj (coll.) chickens; fowl (as a generic designation)
دجاجة dajāja (n. un.) hen; chicken │ الحبش دجاجةd. al-ḥabaš guinea fowl
بالسالح مدجج mudajjaj bi-s-silāḥ heavily armed, bristling with arms 271
دجر dajira a (dajar) to be embarrassed, be at a loss
ديجور dajūr pl. دياجير dayājīr  gloom, darkness, dark
ديجوري daijūrīi dark, gloomy
دجل dajala u to deceive, dupe, cheat, take in ( على s.o.); to be a swindler, a charlatan, a quack II to coat, smear (ھ s.th.); to gild (ھ s.th.); to deceive, dupe, cheat, take in (على s.o.), impose (على on)
دجل dajl deceit, trickery, humbug, swindle
دجال dajjāl pl. -ūn, دجاجلة dajājila swindler, cheat, imposter; quack, charlatan (fem. دجالة); Antichrist
تدجيل tadjīl imposture, humbug; charlatanry, quackery
 دجلة dijla the Tigris river
دجن dajana u (dajn, دجن dujūn) to be dusky, murky, gloomy (day); -- (dujūn) to
 remain, stay; to get used, become accustomed, become habituated; to become tame, be domesticated II to tame; to domesticate (ھ an animal) │ لخدمة دجنه فالن (li-kidmati f.) to put s.th. or s.o. to use for s.o., make s.th. or s.o. of service to s.o. III to flatter, cajole, coax, wheedle, try to win or entice by gentle courtesy (ه s.o.) IV to be murky, gloomy, overcast (day); to be dark (night)
دجنة dujna, dujunna darkness, gloominess, gloom
ادجن adjan  dark
داجن dājin tame, tamed, domesticated (animal); dark, gloomy │ داجنة حيوانات (ḥayawānāt) domestic animals
دواجن dawājin  poultry
دجو) دجا) dajā u to be dark, gloomy, dusky; to overshadow, cover, veil, shroud, blanket ( ھ s.th.), spread (ھ over) III to play the hypocrite, JlOIl'l as a friend (ه of s.o.); to cajole, flatter (ه s.o.)
دجى dujan gloom, darkness, duskiness الليل دياج dayājī l-lail dark of night مداجاة mudājāh hypocrisy; flattery,
adulation, sycophancy
داج dājin dark, gloomy
دحدح II tadaḥdaḥa to waddle
دحدح daḥdaḥ and دحداح daḥdāḥ dumpy, squat, stocky
دحر daḥara a (daḥr, دحور) to drive away, chase away (ه s.o.); to dislodge, remove (ه s.o.); to defeat (ه an army) VIII to be driven away, be routed, be repelled, be thrown back; to be defeated (army); to go under, go to ruin, succumb, break down, collapse
اندحار indiḥār banishment, rejection; (pl. -āt) defeat (mil.); ruin, fall, break- down, collapse; catastrophe │الكون اندحار ind. al-k. end of the world
مدحور madḥūr routed, repelled; expelled, cast out; ostracized, banished
دحرج daḥraja to roll (ھ s.th.) II tadaḥraja to roll, roll along; to roll down
داحس dāḥis pl. dawāḥis whitlow, felon (med.)
دحس daḥasa a (daḥs) to insert, thrust in, shove in, foist in, smuggle in VII to interfere, meddle; to mix
دحض daḥāḍa a to be invalid, void, untenable (argument); to disprove, refute, invalidate (ھ an argument) II and IV to disprove, refute, invalidate (ھ an argument)
دحض daḥḍ refutation, disproof
دحوض duḥūḍ: invalidity, shakiness, weakness, refutability (of an argument or a claim)
مدحاض miḍḥāḍ: مدحاض دعوى (da‘wā) an invalid, unjustified claim 273
دحو) دحا) daḥā u (daḥw) to spread out, flatten, level, unroll
O مدحى midḥan pl. مداح madāḥin roller, steamroller
ذخر see مدخرة iddakara, ادخر dolphin dukas دخس
دخل dikala u (دخول dukūl) to enter (ھ, less frequently في, also الى, s.th.), go, step, walk, move, come, get (الى في، ھ، into); to penetrate, pierce (الى في، ھ، s.th.); to take possession of s.o. (ه), befall, seize (ه s.o.; e.g., doubt); to take up (خدمة a post), start at a job; to enter s.o.’s (على) room or house, drop in on s.o. (على), come to see
s.o. (على); to call on s.o. (على); to consummate the marriage, cohabit, sleep (", or على with a woman); to come (على over s.o.; e.g., joy); (gram.) to be added ( على to); to supervene, enter as a new factor, aspect, element, etc. (على upon s.th.), be newly introduced (على into s.th.); to make one’s own, acquire (على s.th.); to join, enter (ھ or في e.g., a religious community); to participate, take part (ھ in); to set in, begin (time, event); to be included (في in; ضمن ḍimna), fall, come ( تحت ,ضمن في، under), belong, pertain (في، تحت ضمن، to), be within s.th. (,ضمن في، تحت); pass.: dukila to be sickly, diseased, abnormal │تعديل األمر على دخل (ta’dīlun) the matter has undergone modification; دخل الخدمة (kidma) to take up one’s post, start  at a job, report for work; المدرسة دخل (madrasa) to enter school; الميناء دخل (mīnā’) to enter the harbor, put in; دخل الموضوع to come to the point; عقله في دخل
 جسمه في)) dukila fī ‘aqlihi (fī jismihī) to suffer from a mental (physical) disturbance II to make or let enter, bring in, let in (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to enter, insert, include (ه s.th., في or ھ in) III to come over s.o. (ه), befall, seize (ه s.o.; e.g., doubt, suspicion, despair) IV to make or let enter, bring in, let in, admit, lead in, show in (ه s.o.); to move, take, haul (على or ھ في s.th. into); to incorporate, include, embody, insert (في or ھ ھ s.th. in); to cause to set in, bring about, produce, set off, trigger (ھ على s.th. in); to introduce (ھ s.th., e.g., an innovation, an improvement, على in or on s.th.) │المدرسة ادخله (madrasa) to send s.o. to school; على تغييرا ادخل to bring about a change in ...; عليه ادخلت تعديالت (udkilat) the matter was subjected to modifications V to meddle (في in), interfere (في in, with); to interpose, intervene (في in); to invade (في s.th.), intrude, obtrude (في on), disturb (في s.th.); to interlock, mesh, gear VI to meddle (في in, e.g., شؤونه في in s.o.’s affairs), butt in ( الحديث في on a conversation); to interfere ( في in, with), interpose, intervene (في in); to interlock, mesh, gear; to be superimposed; to intergrade, shade, blend (ببعض or بعضه بعض في one into the other); to come over
s.o. (ه), befall, strike, seize (ه s.o.; e.g., doubt. grief)
دخل dakl income; revenues, receipts, returns, takings (as opposed to karj); interference, intervention; doubt, misgiving │الدخل ضريبة income tax; له ليس فيه دخل اي (ayyu daklin) and به دخل ال or له فيه (dakla) he should not meddle in ..., he has nothing to do with ..., it is none of his business
دخل dakal disturbance, derangement, disorder, imbalance, or defect of the mind; defect, infirmity
دخلة dikla intrinsic nature, essence; inner self, innermost, heart, soul (of a person); secret intention │دخلته راجع rāja‘a diḳlatahū to commune with o.s., search one’s soul
ad-d. lailat ليلة الدخلة dukla: دخلة
wedding night
دخلة dukkala a variety of warbler 273
دخيل dakī1 inner, inward, internal; inner self, heart, core; -- (pl. دخالء dukalā’ ) extraneous; foreign, alien; exotic; foreigner, alien, stranger; not genuine, false, spurious; newly added (على to); novice; (new) convert; guest; protégé, charge, ward │دخيلة كلمة (kalima), دخيل لفظ (lafẓ) foreign word or expression; (syr.- pal.) دخيلك (dakīlak) please, if you please
دخيلة dakīla pl. دخائل dakā’il  inner self, inmost being, intrinsic nature, essence; heart, soul │نفسه دخيلة في inwardly, inside, in his heart; نفوسنا دخائل our inmost being; األمور دخائل the underlying nature of things, the factors at the bottom of things; دخائل شؤونه d. šu’ūnih his private affairs, (of a country, etc.) its internal affairs
دخول dukūl entry, entranoe, admission; entering, ingress; beginning, setting in; penetration; intrusion, invasion; first coition in marriage (Isl. Law) │الحرب دخول
d. al-ḥarb entry into war
دخولية dukūlīya octroi, city toll
دخل madkal pl. مداخل madākil  entrance; hallway, vestibule, anteroom; entrance hall, lobby, foyer; mouth (of a port, of a canal); O anode (el.); introduction (to a field of learning); behavior, conduct │ السيارات مدخل (sayyārāt) driveway; مدخل القانون لدراسة introduction to the study of law; المدخل حسن ḥusn al-m. good manners, good conduct
مداخلة mudākala interference, intervention; participation, interest (في in)
ادخال idkāl leading in, showing in, bringing in, taking in, hauling in; involvement, implication; insertion, interpolation, incorporation, inclusion; introduction (e.g., of a constitution; of an improvement, على on an apparatus, or the like)
تدخل tadakkul entry, entrance; invasion; interference (في with, in), intervention; intrusion, obtrusion │ التدخل عدم ‘adam at-
t. noninterference, nonintervention (pol.)
تداخل tadākul interference, intervention; interlock, meshing, gearing; superimposition; intergradations; permeation, pervasion; O interference (phy.)
 داخل belonging, pertaining (في to), falling (في under), included (في in); inner, inward, inside, interior, internal; inside, interior (of s.th.); dākila (prep.) within, inside, in; داخال dākilan inside (adv.) │الداخل من from within; from the inside
داخلة dākila pl. دواخل dawākil  interior, inside, inmost, hidden part; الداخلة the Dakhla oasis (in central Egypt)
داخلي dākilī inner, inward; internal; interior, inside; domestic, home, inland (as opposed to خارجي kārijī external, foreign; pol.); indigenous, native; private; belonging to the house; داخليا dākilīyan inside (adv.) │داخلية تالميذ boarding students (as opposed to خارجية day students); داخلية حرب (ḥarb) civil war; داخلية مدرسة (madrasa) boarding school; داخلية مالبس underwear; داخلية مالحة inland navigation
interior the داخلية البالد│ interior dākilīya داخلية وزارة الداخلية inland; the country, the of وزير الداخلية interior; the of ministry interior the of minister
مدخول madkūl sickly, diseased, abnormal; (mentally) disordered; of weak character, spineless; (pl. مداخيل madākīl ) revenue, receipts, takings, returns
دخمس dakmasa (دخمسة, dakmasa) to fool (على s.o.) about one’s real intentions, pull the wool over s.o.’s (على) eyes; to cheat; to be sly, crafty, artful
دخمسة dakmasa deception, fooling, trickery; cunning, craft, slyness 274
دخن dakina a to be smoky; to taste or smell of smoke; -- dakina a u to smoke, emit smoke (fire) II to fumigate, fume (ھ s.th.); to smoke, cure with smoke (ھ foodstuffs); to smoke (ھ a cigarette, tobacco, a pipe) IV to smoke, emit smoke (tire) V to be smoked, be cured with smoke; to be fumigated
دخن dukn pearl millet, dukhn
دخن dakan smoke, fume, vapor
دخان dukān (dukkān) pl. ادخنة adkina
smoke, fume, vapor; tobacco
دخنة dukna smoke color; a kind of incense (Calamus aromatious)
O دخينة dakīna cigarette
دخاخني dakākinī (eg., tun.) tobacconist
دخن madkana pl. مداخن madākin 
chimney, smokestack, funnel
تدخين tadkīn fumigation; smoking (e.g., of fish); (tobacco) smoking
dawākin  دواخن pl. dākina داخنة
chimney, smokestack, funnel
مدخن mudakkin smoker ديدبان look up alphabetically ديدن daidan habit, practice
ددى III to pamper, spoil (ه a child)
در darra i u (darr) to flow copiously; to stream, flow, well; to accrue (على to s.o.; profit, wealth); to be abundant, plentiful IV to cause to flow; to bestow lavishly, heap (ه على s.th. upon s.o.), shower, overwhelm (ه على with s.th. s.o.); to yield ( ھ a profit, على to s.o.) X to stream, flow; to be abundant; to cause or try to bring about the abundant flow of (ھ); to cause s.th. (ھ) to yield in abundance; to be out for s.th. (ھ), seek to gain (ھ a profit), try to make (ھ a living)
درر darr milk; achievement, accomplishment │دره <I li-llāhi darruhū (literally: his achievement is due to God) how capable, how good, how excellent he is!
در durr (coll.) pearls
درة durra (n. un.) pl. -āt, درر durar pearl; -- a variety of parrot (Psittacus A1exandri L.)
دري durrī glittering, twinkling, brilliant (star)
درة dirra, darra pl. درر dirar teat; udder
مدرار midrār showering abundant rain (sky, cloud); spouting, pouring forth, welling out
دار dārr flowing copiously; productive, rich, lucrative; profitable
diuretic(al), (baul) مدر البول mudirr: مدر (‘araq) مدر العرق diuretics; مدرات البول pl. sudorific
 درأ dara’a (dar’) to reject (ھ s.th.); to avert, ward off (ھ s.th., e.g., خطرا kaṭaran a danger, عن from) VI iddāra’a to contend ( في for)
درء dar’ repulsion, prevention, averting; warding off, parrying
دريئة darī’a pl. -āt target
درابزين darābazīn railing, parapet, banisters, balustrade
دراج Durrës (It. Durazzo, seaport in W Albania)
دراق durrāq (syr.) peach
درامي dərāmī dramatic
درب dariba a (darab, درب durba) to be accustomed, be used (ب to), be practiced, trained, skilled (ب in) II to habituate, accustom (ه ھ، s.o.) s.th., في or ب or على to); to practice, drill (ه s.o., ب على or على in); to school, train, coach, tutor (ه s.o., في، ب or على in) V to be accustomed, be used ( على or في to); to be or become 275 practiced, skilled, trained, drilled, schooled (على or فى in); to train (athlet.)
درب darb pl. دروب durūb narrow mountain pass; path, trail, track; road; alley, lane│التبانة درب d. at-tabbāna the Milky Way
دربة durba habituation, habitude, habit; familiarity (with s.th.), experience; skill, practice
دريبة darība court of first instance (Tun.)
تدريب tadrīb habituation, accustoming; practice; drill; schooling, training, coaching, tutoring│ العسكري التدريب (‘askarī) military training
مدرب mudarrib pl. -ūn instructor, drill instructor; trainer, coach (atthlet.); tamer (of wild animals)
مدرب mudarrab experienced; practiced, skilled; trained; schooled
درازين darābazīn and درزين darbazīn railing, parapet, banisters, balustrade
دربس darbasa to bolt (ھ a door)
درباس dirbās pl. درابيس darābīs  bolt, doorbolt
دربكة darabukka (eg.), dirbakka (syr.) pl. –āt darabukka, a conical, one-headed hand drum, open at the small end
دربكة darbaka banging or rattling noise, din, uproar, turmoil
درج daraja u (دروج durūj) to go, walk, move, proceed, advance (slowly); to approach gradually, step by step (الى s.th.); to follow a course (على), proceed along the lines of ( على), proceed in such and such a manner ( على); to go away, leave, depart; to outgrow (من a nest, a habitation); to be past, bygone, over (time); to have passed away, be extinct; to circulate, be in circulation, be current, have currency; to grow up (child); -- (darj) to roll up, roll together (ھ s.th.); to wrap, wind, twist (ھ على s.th. around); -- darija a to rise or advance step by step│على العرف درج daraja l-‘urfu ‘alā it has become the general practice to ... II to make (ه s.o.) rise or advance by steps, promote (ه s.o.) by degrees; to move or bring (ھ s.th.) gradually closer (الى to); to approximate (ھ الى s.th. to); to roll up, fold up (ھ s.th.); to circulate, put into circulation (ھ s.th.), give currency (ھ to s.th.), make (ھ s.th.) the general practice; to divide into degrees, steps or grades, graduate, grade, gradate (ھ s.th.); to insert, include, enter (ھ فى s.th. in) III to go, keep up (ھ with, e.g., with the time, with a fashion) IV to insert, include, incorporate, embody (ھ فى s.th. in); to enter, register ( ھ فى s.th., e.g., in a list), book (ھ s.th.) V to progress by steps, advance gradually; to proceed step by step (الى to); to make progress (فى in); to graduate, grade, be graded, graduated, gradated VII to be inserted, entered, incorporated, embodied, included (فى in); to be classified (فى in, تحت under) X to make (ه s.o.) advance or rise gradually, promote (ه s.o.) by degrees; to lead (ه s.o.) gradually (الى to), bring (ه s.o.) around to (ل الى،); to bait, allure (ه s.o.); to entice, tempt, lure into destruction (ه s.o.)
درج darj entry, entering, registering, registration, recording; a rolled or folded paper; roll, scroll│ الكتاب درج فى in the book; الكالم درج فى d. il-kalām in the course of the talk
 درج durj pl. ادراج adrāj drawer (of a table, desk, etc.); desk (e.g., for pupils in school)
درج daraj pl. ادراج adrāj way, route, course; flight of steps, stairs, staircase│ ادراجه رجع raja‘a adrājahū (also ادراجه عاد) to retrace one's steps, go back the way one came; to go back, turn back; 276 ادراج ذھب الرياح (adrāja r-riyāḥ) to go the ways of the winds, i.e., to pass unnoticed, without leaving a trace; to end in smoke, come to nothing, be futile, be in vain
درجة daraja pl. -at step, stair; flight of steps, stairs, staircase; degree, step, tone (of a scale; mus.); degree (math., geogr.; of temperature); grade, fate; degree, order, rank; club (also, e.g., in trains, of a decoration); phase state, stage (of a development); mark, grade (in school)│ الحرارة درجة d. al-ḥarāra (degree of) temperature; العليا الدرجات (‘ulyā) the maximal temperatures; السفلى الدرجات (suflā) the minimal temperatures; درجة الطول d. aṯ-ṯūl degree of longitude (geogr.); جامعية) علمية درجة) (‘ilmīya, jāmi’īya) academic degree; العقل درجة d.
al-'aql level of intelligence, IQ; دفتر الدرجات report card (in school); (فى) من االولى الدرجة (ūlā) first-rate, first-class; ذو درجة of superior quality, high-grade, high- class; ان لدرجة (li-darajati) to the extent that ... ; to such an extent that ...; to much that ...
دراج durrāj pl. دراريج darārīj  francolin (zool.); see also alphabetically
تدرج tadruj , تدرجة tadruja pheasant
دراجة ناريةbicycle│ -at pl. darrāja دراجة
motorcycle
مدرج madraj pl. مدارج madārij  way that one follows or pursues; course, route; road, path; starting point, outset, rise, growth, birth, dawn, beginning(s); tarmac, runway (of an airfield); (as also mudarraj) amphitheater; (amphitheatered) auditorium or lecture room; grandstand, bleachers│ مدرجه منذ since its beginnings; نشأته مدرج naš’atihī the place where he grew up; الرقي مدارج فى سار (m. ir-ruqīy) to travel the road of progress
تدريج tadrīj graduation; classification, categorization; gradation│ مع التدريج، على بالتدريج التدريج، gradually, by and by, by degrees, by steps, step by step, more and more
تدريجى tadrījī gradual, gradatory, progressive; تدريجيا tadrījīyan gradually, by and by, by steps, by degrees, in stages
ادراج idrāj insertion, interpolation, incorporation; entry, registration, recording (فى in a list)
تدرج tadarruj gradual advance or progress; gradation, graduation│ بالتدرج gradually, by and by; ارتقائه تدرج t. irtiqā’ihi his gradual rise
استدراجistidrāj capability of gradually winning s.o. over, persuasiveness, art of persuasion
دراجdarrāj current, prevalent, widespread, popular, common, in vogue, circulating, in circulation│ الدراج الكالم (kalām) and الدارجة اللغة (luga) the popular language, colloquial language
مدرج mudarraj graded, graduated; -- (pl.
-āt) open staircase, open-air stairs, fliers, stoop; grandstand, bleachers; amphitheater; (amphitheatered) auditorium or lecture room
مدرج mudrai inserted, interpolated, incorporated; entered, registered; contained, included (ب ,فى in), comprised ( ب ,فى by)
درد darida a (darad) to become toothless, lose one’s teeth
ادرد adrad  toothless
دردى durdī sediment, dregs, lees
دردبيس dardabīs ugly old woman. hag
دردرة dardara roar, rush (of water); idle talk, prattle, chatter
دردار dardār elm (bot.)
دردور durdūr eddy, whirlpool, vortex دردش dardaša idle talk, prattle, chatter 277  درز daraza u to sew, stitch
درز darz pl. دروز durūz seam, hem; suture
  درزى durzī pl. دروز durūz Druse│الدروز جبل jabal ad-d. the Jebel ed Druz, the mountainous homeland of the Druses in S Syria
درس darasa u (dars) to wipe out, blot out, obliterate, efface, extinguish (ھ s.th.); to thresh (ھ grain); to learn, study (ھ s.th., على under s.o.), على العلم درس (‘ilm) to study under (a teacher, a professor); -- u (دروس durūs) to be effaced, obliterated, blotted out, extinguished II to teach; to instruct (ه s.o., ھ in s.th.); III to study (ه together with s.o.) VI to study (ھ s.th.) carefully together VII to become or he wiped out, blotted out, effaced, obliterated, extinguished
درس dars effacement, obliteration, extinction; -- (pl. دروس durūs) study, studies; lesson, chapter (of a textbook); class, class hour, period; lecture; lesson (taught by experience, etc.)│ عن دروسا القى (alqā) to lecture on ... ; دروسا اعطى (a‘ṯā) to give lessons; منزلية دروس (manzilīya) homework (of a pupil or student)
دراس dirās threshing (of grain)
دراسة dirasa pl. -āt studies; study│ دراسة عالية (‘āliya) collegiate studies; ثانوية دراسة (tānawīya) attendance of a secondary school, secondary education, high-school education; متوسطة دراسة (mutawassiṯa) secondary education, high-school education (Syr.)
دراسى dirāsī of or pertaining to study or studies; scholastic, school; instructional, educational, teaching, tuitional│ رسوم دراسية tuition fees; دراسية سنة (sana) academic year; scholastic year, school year
دريس darīs dried clover
(eg.) ad-darīsa ‘ummāl عمال الدريسة
railroad section gang, gandy dancers
دراس darrās pl. -ūn (eager) student O دراسة darrāsa flail; threshing
(ḥaṣṣāda) حصادة دراسة machine│O
combine
درواس dirwās mastiff
مدرسة madrasa pl. مدارس madāris  madrasah (a religious hoarding school associated with a mosque); school│ مدرسة
ابتدائية (ibtidā’īya) the lower grades of a secondary school, approx. = junior high school; اولية مدرسة (awwalīya) elementary school, grade school; ثانوية مدرسة (tānawīya) secondary school, high school; تجارية مدرسة (tijārīya) commercial college or school; حربية مدرسة (ḥarbīya) military academy; داخلية مدرسة (dāḳilīya) boarding school; عليا) عالية مدرسة) (‘āliya, ‘ulyā) college; والصنائع الفنون مدرسة school of industrial arts, school of applied art and handicraft; كبرى مدرسة (kubrā) college; القديمة المدرسة the old “school” (= intellectual or artistic movement)
مدرسي madrasī scholastic, school
تدريس tadrīs teaching, instruction, tuition
│التدريس ھيئة hai’at at-t. teaching staff; faculty, professoriate (of an academic institution)
دارس dāris pl. دوارس dawāris  effaced, obliterated; old, dilapidated, crumbling │ دارسه تجدد tajaddada dārisuhū to rise from one’s ashes
مدرس mudarris pl. -ūn teacher, instructor; lecturer │مساعد مدرس (musā‘id) assistant professor
درع II to arm; to armor, equip with armor (ھ s.th.) V and VIII iddara‘a to arm o.s., take up arms, put on armor
درع dir‘ m. and f., pl. دروع durū‘, ادرع adru‘, ادراع adrā‘ coat of mail, hauberk; (suit of) plate armor; armor plate; armor; armature; (pl. ادراع adrā‘) chemise 278
دراعة darrā‘a pl. -āt armored cruiser
دراعة durrā‘a pl. درارع darārī‘  loose outer garment with sleeves, slit in front
دارع dāri‘ armored, armor-clad, ironclad
دارعة dāri‘a pl. دوارع dawārī‘  armored cruiser
مدرع mudarra‘ armored; armadillo (zool.) │ مدرعة قوة (qūwa) tank corps; سيارة مدرعة (sayyāra) armored car; مدرعون مشاة (mušāh) armored infantry (mil.)
مدرعة mudarra‘a pl. -āt armored cruiser
درف darf side, flank, wing; protection
درفة darfa pl. درف diraf leaf (of a double door or window)
 درفيل darfīl dolphin
  درقةdaraqa (leather) shield O درق daraq thyroid gland
درقي daraqī shield-shaped; thyroid │ الغدة الدرقية(gudda) thyroid gland
  دراق look up alphabetically
 درك II to last, continue, keep up (rains) III to reach, get, catch, overtake, outdistance, outrun (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), catch up, come up (ه ,ھ with); to keep up, continue without interruption (ھ s.th.) IV to attain, reach (ھ s.th.), arrive (ھ at); to get, catch, overtake (ه s.o., ھ s.th.), catch up, come up (ه ,ھ with); to come suddenly, unexpectedly (ه upon s.o.), overtake (ه s.o.; death); to obtain (ھ s.th.); to grasp, comprehend (ھ s.th.); to perceive, discern, notice (ھ s.th.); to realize, understand (ھ s.th.), become aware, become conscious (ھ of s.th.); to mature, ripen (e.g., a fruit); to attain puberty, reach sexual maturity (boy) V المغيب الى الشمس تداركت (šams, magīb) the sun prepared to set VI to reach and seize one another; to continue without interruption, go on incessantly; to face, meet, obviate, take steps to prevent (ھ s.th.); to put in order, set right, correct (ھ s.th.), make amends (ھ for), provide compensation or indemnity (ھ for a loss, or the like) X to correct, rectify, emend (ھ s.th.); to set right, put in order, straighten out (ھ s.th.); to make good, repair, redress (ھ a damage, a mistake, etc.), make up (ھ for); to supplement, supply (ھ that which is missing); to anticipate, forestall, obviate (ھ an event)
درك darak attainment, achievement, accomplishment; overtaking, catching up; police; (pl. ادراك adrāk) bottom, lowest level
دركي darakī policeman
دركة daraka lowest level; pl. –āt descending steps (as opposed to درجات; cf. الموت ودركات الحيات درجات darajāt al-ḥayāh wa-d. al-maut)
دراك darrāk much-accomplishing, efficient, successful
مدارك madārik  mental faculties, mental powers, intelligence, intellectual
capacities, perception, discernment │ الخمس المدارك the five senses
دراكا dirākan (adv.) constantly, incessantly, without interruption
ادراك idrāk reaching, attainment, achievement, accomplishment; realization, perception, discernment, awareness, consciousness (االدراك فقد faqd al-i. unconsciousness); comprehension, understanding, grasp; reason, intelligence; sexual maturity, puberty; age of maturity
│االدراك سن of sinn al-i. age of discretion (Isl. Law)
تدرك tadarruk gradual decline
استدراك istidrāk redress, reparation; correction, emendation, rectification 279
مدرك mudrik rational, reasonable, endowed with reason, intelligent; (sexually) mature, pubescent, at the age of puberty
مدركات mudrakāt realizations; cognitions; fixed notions, established concepts
 درك (Engl.) derrick, derrick crane
درم darima a to fall out (teeth) II to clip, trim (
ھ nails)
درن darina a (daran) to be dirty, filthy IV do.
V to suffer from tuberculosis
درن darn pl. ادران adrān dirt, filth; tubercles; tuberculosis │ رئوي درن (ri’awī) pulmonary tuberculosis
درنة darana (n. un.) pl. -āt tubercle; small tumor, outgrowth, excrescence, tuberculc, nodule
درني daranī tubercular, tuberculous
تدرن tadarrun tuberculosis │رئوي تدرن (ri’awī) and الرئة تدرن t. ar-ri’a pulmonary tuberculosis
تدرني tadarrunī tuberculous
متدرن mutadarrin affected with tubercles, tuberculated
مدره midrāh pl. مداره madārih  spokesman
درھم dirham pl. دراھم darāhim  dirhem, drachma (Ir. = coin of 50 فلس); a weight (Eg. = 1/12 اوقية = ca. 3.12 g); دراھم money, cash
 دريھمات duraihimāt (dimin. with a derogatory sense; approx.:) pennies
دروة dirwa pl. -āt (eg.) protecting screen or wall; parapet
درواس dirwās mastiff
درويش darwīš pl. دراويش darāwīš  dervish
 درى darī ī (دراية dirāya) to know (ب or ھ s.th. or of s.th.); to be aware, be cognizant (ب or ھ of); to understand, comprehend (ب or ھ s.th.) │و اال يدري وما ... all of a sudden there was ... III to flatter, treat with flattery or gentle courtesy, cajole, coax (ه s.o.); to deceive, fool, mislead (ه s.o.); to dissemble; to conceal, hide, mask, disguise (ه s.th.) IV to let (ه s.o.) know (ب s.th. or about s.th.), inform, notify, advise (ه ب s.o. of) │ما ادراك وما ... (adrāka), also ب ادراك وما do you realize what ... is? you don’t even know what ... means! VI to hide, conceal o.s.
دراية dirāya knowledge, cognizance, acquaintance
ادرى adrā more knowledgeable, better informed, knowing better (ب s.o., s.th.), better acquainted (ب with)
ادري ال lā-adrī a skeptic
مداراة mudārāh sociability, affability, companionableness
دار dārin knowing, aware, cognizant (ب of s.th.)
 مدرى midran, مدرة midra (= مردى mirdan), مدراة midrāh pl. مدار madārin pole (esp. one for punting boats)
درياق diryāq (= ترياق) theriaca; antidote
دزينة (It. dozzina) dazzīna dozen
دس dassa u (dass) to put, get, slip, shove, thrust, insert (ھ في s.th. into); to bury (في ھ s.th. in the ground); to instill, infuse (في ھ ب، s.th. in); to administer surreptitiously (السم as-samma poison, ل to s.o.); to foist ( ھ في s.th. into); to smuggle (ھ في s.th. into, ه بين s.o. among); to interpolate (ھ s.th.); to intrigue, scheme, plot (ل ,على against s.o.)
│الدسائس دس to engage in secret machinations, intrigue scheme II to put in, get in, slip in, shove in, thrust in, insert (ھ s.th.); to hide, conceal (ھ s.th.) V to engage (secretly, الى in); to be hidden (في
in) VII to slip (بين between or among, في into), creep, steal, sneak (بين among, في into), 280 infiltrate (في s.th.); to ingratiate o.s., insinuate o.s. (في or الى to s.o., into s.o.’s confidence); to be hidden
دسيسة dasīsa pl. دسائس dasā’is intrigue, machination, scheme, plot │الدسائس دس dass ad-d. machinations, intrigues, scheming, plotting (ضد against); plot, conspiracy
دساس dassās pl. -ūn intriguant, intriguer, schemer, plotter, conspirator; sand snake (Eryx jaculus)
 دست dast pl. دسوت dusūt place of honor, seat of honor, seat of office; council │الحكم دست
d. al-ḥukm (a ruler’s) throne
 دست dist pl. دسوت dusūt kettle, boiler, caldron made of copper (eg., syr.)
 دستة dasta dozen; pack, packet, package
دستور dustūr pl. دساتير dasātīr  statute; regulations; by-laws; (basic) constitutional law; constitution (pol.); -- (colloq.) dastūr permission
دستوري dustūrī constitutional │النظام الدستورى constitutional form of government
دستورية dustūrīya constitutionality │ عدم الدستورية’adam ad-d. unconstitutionality
دسر dasara u (dasr) to push, shove, push off (
ھ s.th.)
O داسر dāsir propeller, airscrew دسكر daskara pl. دساكر dasākir  village دسم dasam fatness (of meat); fat, grease
دسم dasim fat; fatty, greasy, grimy, grubby; rich, abundant, substantial; meaty, pithy, full of thoughts (e.g., reading material)
ادسم adsam , f. دسماء dasmā’ , pl. دسم dusm very fat; fatty, greasy, grimy, grubby; -- richer, more substantial, pithier
دسامة dasāma fattiness, greasiness, griminess, grubbiness
دسومة dusūma fatness; richness, substantiality
دسام dassām plug, stopper
ديسم daisam amaranth (bot.)
 دسمبر disembir, disambir December
دسو II to introduce, bring in (ھ s.th.) V to be hidden, concealed; to penetrate (الى into)
دش (Fr. douche) duš shower, douche
دشيش dašīš and دشيشة a kind of porridge made of crushed wheat and butter
دشت dašt junk, trash, rubbish, refuse
دشن II to hand over, present (ھ s.th.); to consecrate, dedicate, inaugurate (ھ s.th.)
تدشين tadšīn consecration, dedication, inauguration │ الكنيشة تدشين consecration of the church
دشو V to belch, burp, eruct
ودع see da‘a دعة
دع da‘‘ to rebuff, turn down (contemptuously, II the poor, an orphan)
دعب da‘aba a (دعابة du‘āba) to joke, jest, make fun (ه with s.o.) III to play, toy (ھ ه، with s.th., with s.o.); to joke, jest, make fun (ه with s.o.); to give (ه s.o.) a good-natured slap or smack (ب); to flirt (ھا with a woman) ; to dally, philander, play around (ھا with a woman); to play (ه about s.o.; e.g., waves); to stroke gently, caress, fondle (ه s.th.); to beguile, tempt, delude (ه s.o.; said of hopes); to play (ھ a musical instrument) │ البيانو داعبto play on the piano VI to make fun, have fun together, have a good time
داعب dā‘ib joking, jocose, playful, jolly, gay, funny 281
دعابة du‘āba pl. -āt joking, jesting, fun- making, fun; joke, jest
دعاب da‘‘āb jocose, playful, jolly, gay
مداعبة mudā‘aba pl. -āt play, fun- making, fun; joke, jest; pleasantry; dalliance, flirtation, philandery
داعب dā‘ib joking, jocose, playful, jolly, gay, funny
مداعب mudā‘ib joking, jesting
دعبل di‘bil frog spawn, frog’s eggs
مدعبل muda‘bal indisposed, out of sorts; round, ball-shaped
ادعج ad‘aj , f. دعجاء da‘jā’ , pl. دعج du‘j black- eyed; deep-black and large (eye)
دعر da‘ira a (da‘ar) to be immoral
دعر da‘ar immorality, indecency
دعر da‘ir unchaste, lewd, licentious, dissolute, obscene, bawdy, immoral, indecent
دعارة da‘āra, di‘āra indecency, immorality, licentiousness, debauchery │ الدعارة بيت bait ad-d. brothel
داعر dā‘ir pl. دعار du‘‘ār unchaste, lewd, licentious, dissolute, obscene, bawdy, indecent, immoral
دعس da‘asa a (da‘s) to tread underfoot, trample down, crush (ھ s.th.); to knock down, run over (ه s.o.; automobile) VII pass. of I
دعك da‘aka a (da‘k) to rub (ھ s.th.); to scrub, scour (ھ s.th.); to scrub on a washboard ( ھ laundry); to crush, squash, mash (ھ s.th.); to crumple (ھ paper)
دعم da‘ama a (da‘m) and II to support, hold up (ھ s.th.); to prop, shore up, stay, buttress, underpin (ھ s.th.); to cement, consolidate, strengthen (ھ s.th.) VIII ادعم idda‘ama to be supported; to rest, be based (على on)
دعمة da‘ma pl. دعم di‘am support, prop
دعامة di‘āma pl. -āt, دعائم da‘ā’im  support, prop, stay, shore; pier; buttress; pillar (esp. fig., e.g., السيادة دعائم pillars of authority)
تدعيم tad‘īm support, strengthening, reinforcement, consolidation, underpinning
دعو) and دعا (دعي da‘ā u (دعاء du‘ā’) to call (ه s.o.); to summon (ب or ه s.o.), call or send for s.o. (ب or ه); to call up (ب s.o., ل الى، for); to call upon s.o. (ه), appeal to s.o. (ه) for s.th. or to do s.th. (الى ل،), invite, urge ( ه الى ل، s.o. to do s.th.); to invite, ask to come (ه الى s.o. to; e.g., to a banquet); to move, induce, prompt (ه الى ل، s.o. to do s.th.), prevail (ه الى ل، on s.o. to do s.th.); to call (ه ھ ب، s.o. by a name), name (ھ ب، ه s.o. so and so), pass.: دعي du‘iya to be called, be named; to invoke (ﷲ God = to pray to); to wish (ل s.o.) well, bless (ل s.o.; properly: to invoke God in favor of s.o.), invoke a blessing (ب) upon s.o. (ل), pray (ب for s.th., ل on behalf of s.o.), implore (ل ب for s.o. s.th.); to curse (على
 s.o.; properly: to invoke God against s.o.), call down evil, invoke evil (على upon s.o.); to propagate, propagandize (ل s.th.), make propaganda, make publicity (ل for); to demand, require (الى s.th.), call for (الى); to call forth, bring about, cause, provoke, occasion (الى s.th.), give rise (الى to) │دعي لالجتماع (du‘ya) to be summoned, be called into session (parliament); حمل الى دعي السالح du‘iya ilā ḥamli a-silāḥ to be called up for military service, be called to the colors; يدعى رجل ... (yud‘ā) a man
called ..., a man by the name of ...; له دعا العمر بطول (ṭūli l-‘umr) he wished him a long life III to challenge (ه s.o.); to pick a quarrel (ه with); to proceed judicially (ه against), prosecute (ه s.o.) VI to challenge each other, call each 282 other forth or out, summon each other; to evoke one another (thoughts, reminiscences, sentiments); to be dilapidated, be tumble- down, threaten to fall (walls); to sink, subside, cave in; to fall down, sink to the ground (person); to collapse, break down, decline, degenerate (fig., of a cultural phenomenon); to dock together, rally VIII ادعى idda‘ā to allege, claim, maintain (ھ s.th., ان that); to lay claim (ھ to s.th.), demand, claim (ھ s.th.); to make undue claims (ھ to s.th.), arrogate (to o.s.), assume unduly or presumptuously (ھ s.th.); to effect, feign, simulate, pretend, purport (ب s.th.); to testify (in court); to accuse (ب or على ھ s.o. of), charge (ب or ھ على s.o. with), blame (ب or على ھ s.o. for), hold s.th. (ب or ھ) against s.o. (على) X to call or send (ه for s.o.), summon (ه s.o.); to cite, summon for examination or trial (ه s.o.; court, police); to recall (ه s.o., e.g., a diplomatic envoy); to call, appoint (ه s.o., e.g., a professor to a chair); to invoke (ه s.o.); to invite, urge (ه الى s.o. to do s.th.), suggest (ه الى to s.o. s.th. or to do s.th.), call upon s.o. (ه) to do s.th. (الى), appeal (
ه الى to s.o. for s.th. or to do s.th.); to call for (ھ), require, demand, necessitate, make necessary or requisite (ھ s.th.)
دعوة da‘wa call; appeal; bidding, demand, request; call, convocation, summons (الى to), calling up, summoning; (official) summons, citation; invitation; claim, demand, plea; missionary activity, missionary work (also الدعوة نشر našr ad-
d.), propaganda; -- (pl. دعوات da‘awāt) invocation, imploration, supplication, prayer; good wish │صالحات دعوات good wishes; بالشر دعوة (šarr) imprecation, curse; الدعوة صاحب host
دعوى da‘wā pl. دعاوى da‘āwā, دعاو da‘āwin allegation, pretension; claim; lawsuit, case, action, legal proceedings (Isl. Law) │ان بدعوى on the pretext that ...
دعي da‘īy pl. ادعياء ad‘iyā’  adopted son; bastard; braggart, bigmouth, show- off; pretender; swindler, impostor
دعاء du‘ā’ pl. ادعية ad‘iya call; invocation of God, supplication, prayer; request, plea; good wish (ل for s.o.); imprecation, course (على against s.o.)
ادعى ad‘ā more conducive, more stimulating, of greater incentive (ل الى، to), causing or provoking to a greater extent ( ل الى، s.th.)
دعاوة da’āwa, di‘āwa pl. -āt propaganda (pol.); publicity (الى for)
دعاوى da‘āwī, di‘āwī propagandistic
دعاية di‘āya propaganda (pol.)
دعائي di‘ā’ī propagandistic
مدعاة mad‘āh determining factor, decisive motive or incentive, cause, occasion
تداع tadā‘in imminent collapse, impending breakdown; mutual summoning │المعانى تداعى tadā‘ī l-ma‘ānī association of ideas
ادعاء iddi‘ā’ pl. -āt claim; arrogation, undue assumption, presumption; allegation; pretension, pretense; accusation, charge; االدعاء the prosecution (in a court of justice)
استدعاء istid‘ā’ summons, summoning; recall, calling back; official summons, citation
داع dā‘in pl. دعاة du‘āh one who invites, inviter; propagandist; host; motive, reason, cause │داعي ال (dā‘iya) it is not necessary, there is no need, there is no cause (ل for)
داعية dā‘iya one who calls for s.th. (الى), invites to s.th. (الى); propagandist (with foll. genit.
 or الى: of s.th.), herald; 283 (pl. دواع dawā‘in) motive, reason, cause, occasion; pl. دواع requirements, exigencies │داعية حرب warmonger; صحية لدواع li-dawā‘in ṣiḥḥīya for reasons of health; دواعي من سروري it gives me great pleasure ...
مدعو mad‘ūw one invited, guest; called, named, by the name of
متداع mutadā‘in evoking one another, one leading to the other (reminiscences, thoughts); frail. shaky (constitution); dilapidated, tumble-down; ready to fall, threatened with collapse; declining, in a stage of decline, on the downgrade
مدع muda‘in one who makes an allegation or pretension, alleger, pretender; claimer, claimant; plaintiff; prosecutor (jur.); arrogant, presumptuous, bumptious │العمومي المدعي (‘umūmī) the public prosecutor; العام المدعى (‘āmm) do. (Mor.)
مدعى muda‘an claimed; عليه المدعى the defendant (jur.); pl. مدعيات muda‘ayāt claims, pretensions
مستدع mustad‘in applicant, petitioner
دغدغ dagdaga to tickle (ه s.o.); to crush; to chew, munch (ھ s.th.)
 دغر dagara a (dagr, دغرى dagrā) to attack (
على s.o.). fall upon s.o. (على)
دغر dagr attack, assault
دغرى dagrā attack, assault
  دغرى dugrī (eg., syr.) direct, straight; straight ahead
دغش IV الدنيا ادغشت adgašat id-dunyā it became dark, twilight fell
دغش dagaš darkness, dusk, twilight
دغيشة dagīša darkness, dusk
دغص dagiṣa a (dagaṣ) to be chock-full, on tile point of bursting
داغصة dāgiṣa pl. دواغص dawāgiṣ knee-pan, kneecap, patella
دغل dagal pl. ادغال adgāl, دغال digāl place with luxuriant tree growth; thicket, bush, jungle; -- defectiveness, faultiness, corruption
داغل dagil covered with dense undergrowth (place); impenetrable; corrupted
مدغل mudgil covered with dense undergrowth (place); false, perfidious, insidious (in character)
دغم IV and VIII ادغم iddagama to put (ھ في s.th. into), insert, incorporate, embody (في ھ s.th. in); (gram.) to contract (ھ في one letter into another), assimilate (ھ في s.th. to) VII to be incorporated, embodied, merged, amalgamated; to be assimilated, contracted
دف daffa i (دفيف dafīf) to flap the wings (bird)
II to hurry, rush
دف daff pl. دفوف dufūf side; lateral surface
دف duff, daff pl. دفوف dufūf tambourine
دفة daffa side; leaf (of a double door or window); cover (of a book), الدفتان the two covers of a book; rudder, helm │الدفة قائد or الدفة مدير mudīr ad-d. steersman, helmsman; التنفيذ دفة على قبض to take the helm, make o.s. the leader; الدفة يد yad ad-
d. tiller; للشابورة الدفة من (eg.) all together, one and all, all without exception
دفية diffīya (eg.) loose woolen cloak
دفئ dafi’a a and دفؤ dafu’a u to be warm; to feel warm II and IV to warm, heat (ھ s.th.) V, VIII ادفأ iddafa’a and X to warm o.s.
دفء dif’ warmth, warmness, heat دفئ dafi’ and دفيء dafī’ warm دفآن daf’ān , f. دفأى daf’ā warm دفاء difā’ heating
دفاءة dafā’a warmth, warmness, heat
□ دفاية daffāya pl. -āt stove 284
مدافئ pl. midfa’a مدفأة and midfa’ مدفأ
madāfi’  stove, heating stove
تدفئة tadfi’a heating, generation of heat
دفتر daftar pl. دفاتر dafātir   booklet; notebook, copybook; daybook, journal; ledger (com.); roster, register, official register │ حسابي دفتر (ḥisābī) account book; bank- book, passbook; الحسابات دفتر d. al-ḥisābāt letter file, letter book, folder, portfolio;
 الشروط دفتر publication setting forth the terms of a purchase, the conditions of a lease, the stipulations of a contract, or the like; االشتراك دفتر subscription booklet; دفتر الصندوق d. aṣ-ṣundūq cashbook (com.); دفتر المساحة cadastre, land register; اليومية دفتر d. al-yaumīya diary, journal; الدفاتر مسك mask ad-d. bookkeeping
public archives, daftarkāna دفترخانة دفترخانة األمالك العقارية │ (Eg.) office records
d. al-amlāk al-‘aqārīya land-registry office (Tun.)
دفتيريا diftēriyā diphtheria
دفر dafara to push, push back (ه s.o.); dafira a
(dafar) to stink
دفر dafar stench
دفر dafir stinking, fetid
دفس dafasa to hide (A s.th.); to push
دفع dafa‘a a (daf‘) to push; to push away, shove away, push back, drive back, repel, remove, dislodge, drive away (ه ھ، عن s.o., s.th. from); جانبا دفعه (jāniban) to push, shove, or elbow, s.o. aside; to rid (نفسه عن o.s., ھ of s.th.), get rid of s.th.; to get the better (ه ھ، of s.o., of s.th.), conquer, master control (ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to fight (ب ھ s.th. with); to reject, repudiate (ھ s.th.); to rebut, refute, disprove (ھ s.th.); to propel, drive (ھ s.th.); to move, cause, urge, impel, egg on, goad (ه or ب s.o., الى or ل to do s.th.), induce, incite, force, compel, oblige (ه or ب s.o., الى or ل to), make s.o. (ب or ه) do s.th. (الى or ل); to band over, present, turn over (ل or ھ الى s.th. to s.o.); to pay (ثمنا tamanan a price, الى or ل to s.o.) │الى خطاه دفع (kuṭāhū) to wend one’s way to III to resist, withstand (ه s.o., .s.th.). offer resistance (ه ھ، to); to contradict, oppose (ه s.o., عن so as to make him abstain from s.th.), dissuade (ه s.o., عن from); to suppress (ھ s.th.); to defend (عن s.o., s.th.), uphold (عن s.th.); to be entrusted with the defense (عن of s.th., of s.o., also jur.) V to dash forward; to dart off, rush off; to pour forth, flow, stream, gush forth (water); to spring up, make itself felt (an idea, a social tendency, and the like) VI to shove or push one another; to push or shove one another away or aside; to push off, shove off (عن from); to
issue in intermittent bursts, gush forth intermittently; to burst forth, rush out, sally (من from); to be propelled, be driven forward; to storm forward VII to dart off, rush off; to proceed rashly, blindly, without forethought; to be too impetuous, be too hotheaded; to plunge headlong (في into s.th.); to rush, dart. make (الى at s.th.), pounce (الى on s.th.); to rush off, hurry off, go quickly (الى to; with foll. imperf.: to do s.th.); to give o.s. (ل to s.o.); to burst forth, gush out, pour forth, spurt, spout, flow, run (من from; water); to let o.s. be carried away or be overcome (وراء by s.th., e.g., شھواته وراء šahawātihī by one’s bodily appetites, شعوره وراء by one’s feelings, وراء العاجلة by worldly things); to proceed, set out, begin (with foll. imperf.: to do s.th.) X to try to ward off or stave off (ھ s.th., ب by)
دفع daf‘ pushing back, shoving aside; repulsion. driving away, driving off; dispelling; parrying, warding off, staving off; repulse, rejection. repudiation; rebuttal; handing over, turning in; payment 285
دفعة daf‘a (n. vic.) pl. dafa‘āt shove, push, thrust; impetus, impact, momentum, forceful impulse, drive; ejaculation; payment; deposit; disbursement; pl. issues (stock market)
دفعة daf‘a pl. dufu‘āt, dafa‘āt that which issues at anyone time, a burst, a gush, a spurt, and the like; time, instance
│واحدة دفعة (duf‘atan) all at one time, all at once, in one stroke, in one fell swoop; ھذه الدفعة this time; دفعات ست six times; على متفاوتة دفعات (mutafāwita) at different times
دفاع daffā’ propelling, impelling, giving impetus; O piston (techn.)
gun, madāfi‘  مدافع pl. midfa’ مدفع al- (ba‘īdat مدافع بعيدة المرمى │O cannon مدفع رشاش guns; long-range marmā) مدافع ضخمة O gun; machine (raššāš) المدافع المضاد O artillery; heavy (ḍakma) المدافع المقاومة للطائرات or (muḍādda) للطائرات مدفع ثالثي O guns; antiaircraft (muqāwima) three- muḍādd) (tulātī, مضاد للطائرات مدفع ھون (mil.); gun anti-aircraft barreled
m. ḍarb ضرب مدفع الظھر mortar; hāwun m.
 aẓ-ẓuhr marking of exact noon by cannon shot
مدفعي midfa‘ī gun-, cannon-, artillery- (in compounds); artilleryman, gunner, cannoneer
مدفعية midfa‘īya artillery
دفاع difā‘ protection; defense (عن of s.th., of s.o., also jur.) │الدفاع خط kaṭṭ ad-d. line of defense; halfbacks (soccer); مجلس الدفاع majlis ad-d. defense council; وزارة الدفاع ministry of defense, war ministry; الوطني الدفاع (waṭanī) national defense; الدفاع للطائرات المضاد (muḍādd) anti-aircraft defense; شرعي دفاع legitimate self-defense
دفاعي difā‘ī defensive, protective
مدافعة mudāfa‘a defense (عن of s.th.)
اندفاع indifā‘ pl. -āt rush(ing), plunging, plunge (في into); outburst, outbreak eruption; élan, dash, impetuosity, rashness, hotheadedness, fire, exuberance, effusiveness; self-abandon; اندفاعا indifā‘an spontaneously
اندفاعة indifā‘a (n. vic.) sudden outburst, outbreak (e.g., of wailing)
دافع dāfi‘ repellent, expellant; driving, pushing, giving impetus, incentive, impellent, propelling, propulsive, etc.; repeller; payer, e.g., الضرائب دافعوا the tax- payers; (pl. دوافع dawfi‘ ) incentive, impulse, impetus, spur, motive; بدافع (with foll. genit.) motivated by ..., by reason
of ..., on the strength of …
مدفوعات madfū‘āt payments
مدافع mudāfi‘ defender (عن of s.o., of s.th.)
دفق dafaqa u i (dafq) to pour out, pour forth (ھ s.th.); -- u (dafq, دفوق dufūq) to be shed; to flow, well out, spout, gush forth; to overflow (0 with s.th.) V to pour forth, spout forth, gush forth; to rush in; to break forth, break out, burst out; to go off (shot); to plunge blindly (الى في، into s.th.); to rush (على against); to crowd (على into) VII
= V
دفق dafq pouring out, effusion
دفقة dufqa pl. dufuqāt, dufaqāt, dufqāt =
دفعة = (dufqatan) دفقة واحدة│ duf‘a دفعة
دفقة من الماء gusts; ar-rīḥ d. واحدة؛ دفقات الريح
gush of water
دفاق dafāq bursting forth, darting out, rushing out
تدفق tadaffuq outpour, outflow, issue, effluence, efflux, effusion; influx, run, rush, inrush, inpour; outbreak, outburst; impulsiveness; exuberance, effusiveness
دافق dāfiq pl. دوافق dawāfiq  bursting forth, breaking out, erupting; gushing, torrential
متدفق mutadaffiq impulsive; exuberant, effusive 286
دفلى diflā oleander (Nerium oleander L.; bot.)
دفن dafana i (dafn) to bury, inter, inhume (ه s.o.); to hide, conceal, keep secret (ھ s.th.)
دفن dafn burial, interment, inhumation
دفين dafn pl. دفناء dufanā’  buried, intend; hidden, secret
دفينة dafīna pl. دفائن dafā’in  hidden treasure, treasure-trove
مدفن madfan, مدفنة madfana pl. مدافن madāfin   burying place, burial ground, cemetery
دفئ see دفاية
دق daqqa i (دقة diqqa) to be thin, fine, fragile, frail; to be little, small, tiny, minute; to be subtle, delicate; to be insignificant, unimportant, trifling, inconsiderable; to be too fine, too subtle (عن for perception); -- u (daqq) to crush, bruise, bray (ھ s.th.); to grind, pulverize, powder (ھ s.th.); to pound (ھ s.th., e.g., meat); to strike (clock); to beat, throb (heart); to hammer, throb (engine); to knock, rap, bang (الباب al-bāba on the door); to bump (بالحائط رأسه ra’sahū bi-l-ḥā’iṭ one’s head against the wall); to drive (ھ a nail); to ram in, drive in (constr. eng.); to beat, strum, play (على a musical instrument); to type (على on a typewriter); -- to sound, resound, ring out (said of musical instruments) │ دق الجرس(jarasa) to ring the bell; جرس دق الخطر (j. al-kaṭar) to sound the alarm; دق على الجرس to call s.o. up, give s.o. a ring; الجرس دق (jarasu) the bell rang; الساعة دقت the clock struck II to triturate, pulverize, reduce to powder (oil s.th.); to he precise,
 exact, strict, meticulous, painstaking, proceed with utmost accuracy or care (في in s.th.); to scrutinize, examine closely, determine exactly (ه s.th.); to do (ه s.th.) carefully, with precision! البحث دقق (baḥta) to investigate carefully; النظر دقق (naẓara) to watch attentively or carefully, scrutinize, examine closely (في s.th.); دقق المالحظة (mulāḥaẓa) to observe closely III to deal scrupulously (ه with s.o.) IV to make fine, make thin (ه s.th.) VII to be crushed, brayed, pounded; to be broken │ عنقه اندق (‘unquhū) he broke his neck X to be or become thin or fine
دق daqq crushing, bruising, braying, pounding; pulverization, trituration; grinding (down); beat(ing), throb(bing); bang(ing), knock(ing), rap(ping); tattoo(ing) │الجرس دق d. al-jaras peal, ringing, sound of a bell; الحنق دق d. al- ḥanak chatter, prattle
دق diqq fine, thin; little, small, tiny, minute; delicate, fragile, frail │دق شجر (šajar) shrubbery, brush, scrub; الدق حمى ḥumma d-d. hectic fever
دقة daqqa (n. vic.) pl. -āt bang, knock, rap; beat, throb; stroke, striking (of a clock); hammer, hammering sound; thumping, thump │القلب دقات d. al-qalb heartbeats; الجرس دقة d. al-jaras peal, or ring, of a bell; telephone call, ring
دقة diqqa thinness; fineness; smallness, tininess, minuteness; triviality, pettiness, paltriness; subtlety, subtleness, finesse; critical or precarious state, delicate situation; accuracy, exactness, exactitude, precision │بدقة exactly, accurately, precisely, minutely, painstakingly, meticulously, sharply; الشعور دقة acuteness of feeling, sensitivity, sensitiveness, sensibility
دقة duqqa pl. دقق duqaq fine dust; powder
دقاق duqāq crushed, brayed, or pulverized, substance; powder; dour of lupine
دقيق daqīq pl. دقاق diqaq, ادقة adiqqa fine, thin; delicate, frail, fragile; little, small, tiny, puny, minute; subtle; 287 paltry, petty, trifling, trivial; precise,
accurate, exact; painstaking, scrupulous, meticulous; inexorable, relentless, strict, rigorous; delicate (situation), critical, trying, serious, precarious; -- flour, meal
│الحساب دقيق keeping strict account, strict, relentless, inexorable; الشعور دقيق sensitive; الصنع دقيق d. aṣ-ṣan‘ finely worked, of delicate workmanship; النظر دقيق d. an- naẓar clear-sighted, penetrating, discerning, sensitive; دقيق ابو abū d. butterfly; الدقيقة األعضاء (a‘ḍā’) the genitals
دقيقة daqīqa pl. دقائق daqā’iq  particle; nicety; intricacy; detail, particular; minute (time unit) │األمور دقائق the niceties, intricacies, or secret implications of things
دقاق daqqāq grinder, crusher; flour merchant; frequently or constantly beating, striking, etc.; player of an instrument │دقاقة ساعة repeater (watch)
دقاقة daqqāqa knocker, rapper (of a door)
ادق adaqq  finer; more delicate; smaller, tinier; more accurate, preciser; stricter
مدق midaqq beetle; pounder, pestle;
(eg.) trail, footpath
مدقة midaqqa pl. مداق madāqq  pounder, pestle; beetle; clapper. tongue (of a bell)
تدقيق tadqīq accuracy, precision, exactness, exactitude بتدقيق exactly, precisely, accurately, minutely
مدقق mudaqqiq exact, accurate (scholar), thorough (investigator), painstaking, meticulous, strict, relentless
مدقق mudaqqiq precise, exact (data)
داقرة dāqira pl. دواقر dawāqir  elay vessel   (tun.); -- stipend for underprivileged students (tun.)
دقشوم daqšūm (eg.) rubblestone, crushed rock; brickbats, gravel
دقع daqi‘a a (daqa‘) to grovel, cringe; to be miserable, wretched, humble, abject; to live in poverty IV do.; to make miserable ( ه s.o.; poverty)
ادقاع iddiqā‘ mass poverty
مدقع mudqi‘ miserable, wretched; degrading, abasing (poverty)
 دقل daqal mast (of a ship); mainmast; (coll.; n. un. ة) a brand of dates of good quality (magr.)
 دك dakka u (dakk) to make flat, level or even, to smooth, level, ram, stamp, tamp (ھ earth, the ground, a road); to press down, weigh down; to beat down; to devastate, demolish, destroy, ruin (ھ s.th.) II to mix, mingle (ه s.th.) VII to be crushed; to be leveled
دك dakk pl. دكوك dukūk level ground; -- devastation, demolition, destruction
دكة dakka pl. -āt rubblestone, crushed rock; hallast
دكة dikka pl. دكك dikak bench
دكان dukkān pl. دكاكين dakākīn  bench; store, shop
دكانجي dukkānjī storekeeper, shopkeeper, retailer
مدك midakk pl. -āt ramrod; O tamper rammer
 دك II to provide (ھ trousers) with a waist- band (dikka or tikka)
دكة dikka (= تكة tikka) waistband (in the upper seam of trousers)
دكتاتورية diktātūrīya dictatorship
دكتاتورى diktātūrī dictatorial
دكتور في │ doctor dakātira كاترة pl. duktūr دكتور دكتور في الطب LL.D.; laws, of doctorالحقوق M.D. medicine, of doctor (ṭibb)
دكتوراة duktūrāh doctorate, doctorship, doctor’s degree, title of doctor │ الدكتور الفخرية (fakrīya) honorary doctorate 288
ذكر see ادكر
دكريتو (It. decreto) dikrītō pl. دكريتات decree
dukn دكن pl. daknā’  دكناء f. adkan , ادكن 
blackish, dark (color)
داكن dākin dark, dark-colored │احضر داكن dark green; داكن اصفر yellowish, of a dingy yellow, mud-colored
دك  see دكان 
دل dalla a (داللة dalāa) to show, demonstrate, point out (ه على to s.o. s.th.); to lead, guide, direct, conduct (الى or ه على s.o. to), show s.o. (ه) the way (الى or على to); to show, indicate, mark (على s.th.); to point (
على to s.th.), evince, indicate, denote, imply, bespeak, suggest (على s.th.), be indicative, be suggestive (على of); to furnish evidence (على for s.th.), prove (على s.th.); -- (1  pers. perf. dalaltu) i (دالل dalīl) to be coquettish, flirt, dally (of a woman; على with s.o.) II to prove (على s.th.), furnish the proof (على for), confirm, corroborate (على ب s.th. with); to sell or put up at auction, auction off (على s.th.); to pamper, coddle, spoil (ه s.o.); to fondle, caress, pet (ه a child) IV to make free, take liberties (على with s.o.); to pride o.s. (ب on), be conceited (ب of) V to be coquettish, flirt, dally (of a woman; على with s.o.); to be coy, behave affectedly; to take liberties (على with s.o.); to pamper, coddle (على s.o.) X to ask to be shown (على s.th.); to seek information, inform o.s. (على about); to obtain information; to be informed (على about); to be guided (ب by), act or proceed in accordance with (ب); to conclude, gather, infer (على s.th., ب or من from), draw conclusions (ب or من from, على with regard to), judge (على s.th., ب or من by)
دل dall proper, dignified conduct; coquetry, flirtation
دلة dalla pl. دالل dilāl pot with long curved spout and handle used for making coffee (among Syrian nomads and in some parts of Saudi Arabia)
دالل dalāl coquetry, coquettishness; pampering, coddling, spoiling
دليل dalīl pl. ادلة adilla, دالئل dalā’l , ادالء adillā’  (the latter of persons) indication ( على of); sign, token; symptom; proof, evidence (على of); guide; tourist guide, cicerone; pilot (of a ship, of an airplane); guidebook, guide manual, handbook; directory, telephone directory; railroad guide, timetable; guide rail (tech.); roller path (in steel construction) │على الدليل اقام to furnish the proof for, demonstrate, prove s.th.; ظرفي دليل (ẓarfī) circumstantial evidence; قاطع دليل cogent proof, conclusive evidence
دالل dallāl auctioneer; broker, jobber, middleman, agent, commission merchant; hawker
 داللة dalāla pl. -āt pointing; guidance; leading, leadership; indication (على of); sign, token; sense, meaning
داللة dilāla auction, public sale; business of a broker or middleman; brokerage commission; trade of a dealer, jobber or agent
داللة dallāla middlewoman, woman broker
ادل adall  proving more cogently (على s.th.), more indicative or suggestive (على of) │على دليل ادل (dalīlin) the surest evidence of, the best proof of
تدليل tadlīl reasoning, argumentation, demonstration; proving (على of), furnishing of proof or evidence (على for); corroboration, substantiation, confirmation; pampering, oeddling, spoiling; fondling, petting, caressing; pet form (of a name) │التدليل اسم pet name; تدليال من a pet form of ...
تدلل tadallul coquetry, coquettishness; pampering, coddling, spoiling 289
استدالل istidlāl reasoning, argumentation, demonstration; conclusion, inference, deduction; proof, evidence (على of)
دالة dālla familiarity, chumminess; liberty (that one takes with s.o.); audacity. boldness
مدلول madlūl proven; (pl. -āt) meaning, sense │الكلمات مدلوالت m. al-kalimāt lexical meanings
مدلل mudallal pampered, spoiled (child)
مدل mudill presumptuous, arrogant │مدل بنفسه (bi-nafsihī) conceited, self-important
 دل dulb plane tree, sycamore (bot.)  دولب pl. دواليب look up alphabetically دلتا Nile Delta, Lower Egypt
دلج IV to set out at nightfall
دلوح dalūḥ pl. دلح duluḥ moisture-laden cloud
دلدل daldala to set into a swinging motion, dangle II tadaldala to hang loosely, dangle
دلدل duldul and دلدول duldūl porcupine (zool.)
دلس II to swindle, cheat; to counterfeit, forge, falsify (ھ s.th.) III to deceive, defraud (ه s.o.), impose (ه on)
تدليس tadlīs deceit, fraud; swindle
تدليسي tadlīsī fraudulent
مدلس mudallas forged, counterfeit │نقود مدلسة counterfeit money; مدلسة مفاتيح forged keys
دلع dala‘a a (dal‘) with لسانه lisānahū: to stick out one’s tongue; to loll, let the tongue hang out II to pamper, spoil (ه a child); to caress, fondle, pet (ه s.o.) IV نفسه يدلع شيء (eg.) a nauseating, disgusting thing VII to stick out, be stuck out, hang out, loll (tongue); to dart out, lick out, leap out. dare up (dame), break out (fire); to be pampered, spoiled (child)
name pet ad-d. ism اسم الدلع dal‘: دلع
دالع dallā‘ (coll.; n. un. ة) watermelon (magr.)
دلغان dilgan clay
دلف dalafa i (dalf, دلوف dulūf, دلفان dalafān) to walk with short steps. toddle; to go or walk slowly, saunter, stroll (الى to); to advance (Jo toward); to approach step by step (الى s.o. or s.th.); to penetrate, reach ( الى as far as); to grope (الى for, of the hand); to leak, drip, trickle (water)
O دالف dālif pl. دوالف dawālif  ricochet (mil.)
دلفين dulfīn pl. دالفين dalāfīn  dolphin
دلق dalaqa u to spill, pour out (ھ a liquid) VII to be spilled (liquid)
دلك dalaka u (dalk) to rub (ھ s.th.); to stroke ( ھ s.th.), pass the hand (ھ over s.th.); to knead (العجين the dough); -- u (دلوك dulūk) to set, go down (sun) II to rub (ھ s.th., ه s.o.), embrocate (ھ s.th.); to knead; to massage (ه s.o.)
دلك dalk rubbing; grazing, brushing, touching, touch
دلوك dalūk liniment
sunset aš-šams d. دلوك الشمس dulūk, دلوك
تدليك tadlīk embrocation; massage
مدلكة mudallika pl. -āt masseuse
 دله II to rob s.o. (ه) of his senses, drive (ه s.o.) crazy (love) V to go out of one’s mind, go crazy (with love) │حبه في تدلھت (ḥubbihī) she has fallen in love with him
مدله mudallah madly in love 290
دلھم IV idlahamma to be dark, gloomy; to be deep-black
دلھم dalham dark, gloomy; deep-black
ادلھمام idlihmām a deep black
مدلھم mudlahimm dark, gloomy; deep- black
دلو II to let hang, dangle (ھ s.th.); to hang, suspend (ھ s.th.); to lower (ھ s.th.); to drop, let down, let fall down (ھ s.th.) IV = II; to cast down (ھ glances, الى on s.o.); to let one’s glance (بانظاره bi-anẓārihī) sweep down; to express, utter, voice (ب s.th., e.g., برأيه bi-ra’yihī one’s opinion); to deliver, make (بتصريح a statement; pol.); to adduce, present, advance, offer (بحجة bi- ḥijjatin an argument); to inform, notify, advise (الى ب s.o. of), let (الى s.o.) know (ب about); to offer, present (الى ب to s.o. s.th.); to grant, give (ل بحديث an interview to s.o.); to slander, defame: asperse (في s.o.) │الدالء بين دلوه ادلى (dalwahū, dilā’) or الدالء في بدلوه ادلى to make one’s  contribution (together with others), add one’s touch, put in one’s two bits’ worth V to hang down, be suspended, dangle (ب from); to be lowered, be let down; to be or become low; to sink, descend │للسقوط تدلى to threaten to fall down, be ready to fall
دلو dalw usually f., pl. ادل adlin, دالء dilā’, ادالء adlā’ leather bucket; bucket, pail; Aquarius (astron.)
دالية dallāya pendant
ادالء idlā’ delivery (of a statement); utterance, statement; presentation; granting
دالية dāliya pl. دوال dawālin waterwheel (for irrigation); trellis, espalier on which grapevines are trained; varix, varicose vein
متدل mutadallin pendent, suspended, hanging, dangling; projecting, overhanging, ready to fall down
داليا look up alphabetically
 دم dam pl. دماء dimā’ blood; دماء homicide cases (jur.) │األخوين دم d. al-akawain dragon’s blood (a dark-red, resinous substance derived from the dragon tree, Dracaena draco)
دمي damī blood- (in compounds), sanguine
دموي damawī blood- (in compounds), sanguine; sanguinary, bloody
 دم damma u (damm) to coat, smear, besmear ( ھ ب s.th. with); to paint, daub, color, dye, tinge, tint (ھ ب s.th. with) II to rub, embrocate, anoint (ھ ب s.th. with)
دم damm ointment, unguent, salve, liniment, embrocation; paint; pigment, dye, dyestuff; rouge
دمام dimām ointment, unguent, salve, liniment, embrocation; paint; pigment, dye, dyestuff; rouge
دميم damīm pl. دمام dimām ugly; deformed, misshapen │ الخلقة دميمd. al- kilqa ugly to look at, of repulsive appearance
دمامي damāma ugliness; ugly appearance; abominableness, monstrosity
الدمام ad-dammām Dammam (seaport in E Saudi Arabia, on the Persian Gulf)
دمث damuta u (دماثة damāta) to be gentle, mild (character) II to soften, mellow (ھ s.th.)
دمث األخالق dimāt: دماث pl. damit دمث
gentle, mild-tempered
دماثة damāta mildness, gentleness, tenderness (of character)
دمج damaja u (دومج dumūj to enter (في s.th.), go or come into (في), be inserted, incorporated (في in) II to write shorthand IV to twist tightly, twine firmly (ھ s.th.); to enter, insert, include, incorporate, embody (ھ في s.th. in); to 291 introduce, interpolate, intercalate (ھ في s.th. in); to annex (في s.th. to) VII to be inserted, be incorporated (في in); to be annexed (في to); to merge (في with), be swallowed up, be absorbed (في by); to be fused, fuse, amalgamate
تدميج tadmīj shorthand, stenography
 ادماج idmāj insertion, incorporation, interpolation; inclusion (في in); assimilation
اندماج indimāj incorporation, insertion ( في in); amalgamation, merger, merging (في with); absorption (في by); annexation (في to); fusion; assimilation
مدمج mudmaj firm, compact
مندمج mundamij firm, compact, tight
دمجانة damajāna (also دامجانة) pl. -āt demijohn, carboy
دمدم damdama to mutter, grumble, growl, snarl
دمدم damdama pl. -āt growl, snarl; rumbling noise, rumble
 دمر damara u to perish, he ruined, he destroyed II to annihilate, destroy, ruin, demolish, wreck (ھ s.th.) V to he destroyed, demolished, ruined, wrecked VII to he destroyed, be annihilated
دمار damār ruin, destruction
تدمير tadmīr annihilation, destruction, demolition
اندمار indimār utter defeat, rout, destruction, annihilation
مدمرة mudammira pl. -āt destroyer (naut.)
  دمورdammūr (eg.) a coarse calico-like fabric
دموري dammūrī (eg.) made of dammūr
(see above)
  دميرة damīra (eg.) flood season of the Nile
 □ دومرى الlā dūmarī (= تدمري ال) nobody, no one, not a living soul
  تدمر tadmur , usually pronounced tudmur, Palmyra (ancient city in Syria, now a small village)
تدمري tadmurī, usually pronounced tudmurī, someone, somebody; تدمري ال nobody, no one, not a living soul
دمس damasa u to hide, conceal, disguise (ھ s.th.); to bury (األرض في ه s.o. in the ground) II do.
دمس dims (eg.) cinders, ashes
دماسة damāsa darkness
ادماس admās (pl.) hovels, shanties, huts
damāmīs  دماميس pl. dammūs دموس
cave, cavern
ديماس daimās, dīmās, ديموس daimūs pl.
دياميس dayāmīs  dungeon; vault
دامس dāmis pitch-dark; dark, gloomy, dusky
مدمس فول fūl mudammas stewed beans
دمشق dimašq , dimišq  Damascus (capital of Syria)
مدمشق mudamšaq damascened, damasked; (syr.) having adopted a sophisticated style of living (imitating that of Damascus), urbanized
دمع dama‘a a to water (eye) IV to cause to weep, evoke tears, make (the eyes) water
دمع dam‘ pl. دموع dumū‘ tears
دمعة dam‘a (n. un.) tear, teardrop; (eg.)
dim‘a gravy
teargas (qunbula) قنبلة دمعية dam‘ī: دمعي bomb
دمعة dam‘a and دميع damī’ pl. دمعى dam‘ā, دمائع damā’i‘  readily inclined to weep, frequently weeping, tearful, lachrymose (woman) 292
دموع damū‘ and دماع dammā‘ watering, watery, tearful (eyes)
madāmi‘ مدامع pl. madma‘ مدمع
lachrymal canal
 دمغ damaga a to refute, invalidate (ھ a falsehood, an error, a false accusation); to triumph (ھ over falsehood; said of truth)
دماغ dimāg pl. ادمغة admiga brain
دامغة dāmiga cogent argument; شھادة دامغة (šahāda) irrefutable testimony
 دمغ damaga u (damg) to stamp, provide or mark with a stamp (ھ s.th.); to hallmark ( ھ gold and silver articles); to brand (ھ an animal)
d. دمغ المصوغات│ stamping damg دمغ
al-maṣūgāt hallmarking of gold and silver articles
دمغة damga stamp; hallmark (on gold and silver articles) │دمغة ورق waraq d. stamped paper
مدموغ madmūg stamped, bearing a stamp
 دمقراطي dimuqrāṭī democratic; democrat
دمقراطية dimuqrāṭīya democracy; democratic attitude or conviction
دمقس dimaqs raw silk
دمقسي dimaqsī silken, silky
مدموك madmūk and مدمك mudmak firm, tight, taut
دمل damala u (daml, دمالن damalān) to fertilize, manure, dung (ھ the soil); -- damila a (damal) to heal, heal up, scar over, cicatrize (wound) VII to heal, heal up, scar overt cicatrize (wound); to fester, suppurate (sore)
دمل dummal (n. un. ة) pl. دمامل damāmil  , دماميل damāmīl  abscess, boil, sore, tumor, ulcer; furuncle; bubo, plague boil; inveterate evil
دملي طاعون ṭā‘ūn dummalī bubonic plague
دملج dumluj pl. دمالج damālij , bracelet, bangle
 دمن damana u (damn) to fertilize, manure, dung (ھ the soil) IV to give o.s. up, devote o.s., apply o.s. (على or ھ to), go in for (على or ھ); to be addicted (على e.g., to liquor)
دمن dimn (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. دمن diman
fertilizer, manure, dung
دمنة dimna pl. دمن diman vestiges or remnants of a dwelling, ruins
دمان damān fertilizer, manure, dung
ادمان idmān addiction; excess; mania; dipsomania │المسكرات ادمان i. al-muskirāt alcoholism
مدمن mudmin addicted, given up (على e.g., to wine); an addict (على of)
دومان see dumān دمان 
دمنھور damanhūr  Damanhur (city in N Egypt)
دم  see دموي
 دمى damiya a to bleed II and IV to cause to bleed
دام dāmin bleeding, bloody, gory
مدمى mudamman, f. مدماة bloody; blood- red
 دمية dumya pl. دمى duman statue, statuette; image, effigy; dummy; doll
دمياط dimyāṭ  Damietta (city in N Egypt)
دن danna u (dann, دنين danīn) to buzz, hum (insect); to drone
دن dann and دنين danīn buzz(ing), hum(ming), droning, drone
دن dann pl. دنان dinān earthen wine jug 293
دنأ dana’a a and دنؤ danu’a u (دنوءة dunū’a, دناءة danā’a) to be low, mean, base, vile, contemptible, despicable
دنيء danī’ pl. ادنياء adniyā’ , ادناء adnā’ low, base, mean, vile, despicable, contemptible; inferior, second-rate, of poor quality
ادنأ adna’  lower, viler, meaner; more inferior, of poorer quality
دناءة danā’a lowness, baseness, meanness, vileness; inferiority
دنتلة ,دنتال (Fr. dentelle) dantilla lace, lacework دنجل dinjil (eg.) pl. دناجل danājil  axle, axle-tree دندرمه (Turk. dondurma) dandurma ice cream دنادشة danādiša common people, people of no
consequence
دندن dandana to buzz, hum; to drone; to hum softly, croon (a song); to murmur
دندي dindī (eg.) turkey
دينار pl. دنانير look up alphabetically
دنس danisa a (danas) to be soiled, sullied, defiled, polluted II to stain, soil, dirty, befoul, sully, pollute, contaminate (ھ s.th.); to dishonor, disgrace (ھ s.th.); to desecrate (ھ s.th.) V pass. of II
دنس danas pl. ادناس adnās uncleanness, dirt, filth, squalor; stain, blemish, fault
دنس danis pl. ادناس adnās, دنساء dunasā’  unclean, soiled, sullied, foul, polluted, defiled, stained
تدنيس tadnīs pollution, defilement, soiling, sullying, contamination; dishonoring, disgracing; desecration, profanation
دنف danifa a (danaf) to be seriously ill IV do.
دنف danif pl. ادناف adnāf seriouly ill
 دنف danaf long illness; O cachexia, marasmus (med.)
مدنف mudnif, mudnaf emaciated, haggard, weak
دانق look up alphabetically
دنقلة dunqula Dongola (town in N Sudan, on the Nile)
دنكل = دنجل
دنمرك danmark  Denmark
(دنو and دنا (دنى danū u (دنو dunūw, دناوة danāwa) to be near, be close; to come or go near s.o. or s.th. (من or الى or ل), approach (ل الى، من، s.o., s.th.); to come close, get close (ل الى، من، to), approximate (ل الى، من، s.th.); to draw near, be imminent (time, event); من به دنا to bring
s.o. close to ...; -- دني daniya a (دنا danan, دناية danaya) to be low, lowly; to be or become mean, base, vile, despicable, contemptible II to bring close (ھ s.th., ه s.o., من to), bring, take or move (ھ s.th., ه s.o.) near (من), approximate (ھ s.th., من to); to apply o.s. (في to s.th.), busy o.s. (في with s.th.), delve (في into); نفسه دنى (nafsahū) to lower o.s., abase o.s., humble
o.s. III to approach (ه s.o., ھ s.th.), come or get near s.o. or s.th. (ھ ه،), come or get close (ھ ه to); to approximate (ھ s.th.); to measure up (ه ھ، to) │يدانى ال شيء (yudānā) an unequaled thing IV to be near, be close; to approach (من or الى or ل s.o. or s.th.), come, go or draw near s.o. or s.th. ( ل الى، من،), come close, get close (ل الى، من، to); to bring close (ه s.o., ھ s.th., من to), bring, take or move (ه s.o., ھ s.th.) near ( من), approximate (ھ s.th., من to); to lower, drop (ھ s.th., e.g., the veil) V to approach gradually (الى s.th. or s.o.); to be debased, sink low, sink, decline; to lower o.s., abase o.s., humble o.s. VI to come near each other, get close to each other, approach one another; to 294 be close together; to approach, approximate (من s.th.) VIII ادنى iddanā to be near, be close, come or draw near, approach X to wish to be nearer or closer, try to come nearer or closer; to seek to fetch or bring closer (ھ s.th., الى to, to o.s.), reach out (ھ for s.th.), wish (ه اليه for s.th.)
دنو dunūw advent, approach; proximity, nearness, imminence (of an event)
دنى danīy pl. ادنياء adniyā’ near, close; low, lowly; mean, base, vile, despicable, contemptible, inferior, infamous, depraved
دنية danīy pl. -āt, دنايا danāyā a base quality or habit; s.th. disgraceful, infamy, vile action
ادنى adnā, f. دنيا dunyā pl. m. ادان adānin, ادنون adnūn pl. f. دنى dunan nearer, closer; situated lower down, nether; lower, inferior; lowlier; smaller, of less significance; more appropriate, better suited, more suitable │األدنى الشرق (šarq) the Near East; األدنى المغرب (magrib) Algeria; الوريد حبل من ادنى (ḥabli al-warīd) very near or close, imminent; األدنون األقارب the closest relatives; اقصاه الى ادناه من (aqṣāhū) from one end to the other; wholly, entirely, completely, altogether; األدنى الحد (ḥadd) the minimum; ادناه hereinafter, below (in writings, documents, etc.) e.g., ادناه الموقعون (muwaqqi‘ūn) those signed below, the undersigned; ادنى ال (with foll. genit.) not the least, not a single, not one
دنيا dunyā (f. of ادنى adnā) world; earth; this world (as opposed to آخرة); life in this world. worldly existence; worldly. temporal things or possessions; earthly things or concerns │الدنيا الحياة life in this world; الدنيا ام umm ad-d. Cairo; الدنيا اقام واقعدھا aqāma d-d. wa-aq‘adahā approx.: to kick up a dust, make a stir, move heaven and earth
دنيوي dunyawī, دنياوي dunyāwī worldly, mundane, secular; earthly, temporal, transitory, transient
دناوة danāwa nearness, closeness, proximity, propinquity; lowness, lowliness; meanness, baseness, vileness
دناية danāya lowness, lowliness; meanness, baseness, vileness
تدن tadannin sinking, decline; low level, nadir (fig.) │األخالقي التدني (aklāqī) the low level of morality, the moral decline
دان dānin low; near, close
متدان mutadānin close together
 دھر dahr pl. دھور duhūr, ادھر adhur time; long time, age, epoch; lifetime; eternity; fate, destiny │الدھر بنات banāt ad-d. blows of fate, trials, afflictions, misfortune; تصاريف الدھر and الدھر صروف vicissitudes of fate. changes of fortune; adversities, adverse circumstances; الداھرين دھر dahra d- dāhirīn for all eternity, foever and ever; الدھر أخر الى ilā ākir d-d. do.; كله الدھر ... ال (ad-dahra kullahū) never in all one’s life
دھري dahrī an adherent of the dahrīya, a materialistic, atheistic doctrine in Islam; atheist, freethinker
دھري duhrī very old, far advanced in years
دھس dahasa a (= داس) to trample underfoot, trample down, crush (ھ s.th.), tread (ھ on s.th.); to run over (ه s.o.)
دھش dahiša a and pass. duhiša to be astonished, amazed, surprised (من or ل at); to wonder, marvel (من at); to be baffled, startled, puzzled, perplexed, taken aback ( من or ل by) II and IV to astonish, amaze, surprise, baffle, puzzle, perplex, startle (ه s.o.) VII = dahiša 295 دھش dahaš perplexity, surprise, consternation, alarm, dismay
دھش dahiš astonished, amazed, surprised; baffled, puzzled, nonplused, perplexed, startled, disconcerted, alarmed, upset; dazed, stunned
دھشة dahša astonishment, amazement, surprise, wonder; perplexity, consternation, bafflement, bewilderment, dismay, alarm
اندھاش indihāš astonishment, amazement; perplexity, consternation, bafflement, bewilderment
مدھش mudhiš astonishing, amazing, surprising, marvelous; pl. -āt amazing things, marvels, wonders
مدھوش madhūš and مندھش mundahiš astonished, amazed, surprised; perplexed, baffled, puzzled, nonplused, startled; overwhelmed
 دھق dahaq stocks (to hold the feet of an offender by way of punishment)
دھاق diḥāq full (cup), brimful
  دھقانdihqān, pl. دھاقنة dahāqina, دھاقين dahāqīn  man of importance, one who plays an important role, leading personality; grandee (in ancient Persia) │ السياسة دھاقين d. as-siyāsa the political leaders
دھك dahaka a (dahk) to crush; to mash (ھ s.th.)
دھلز II tadahlaza to stroll about, walk about (in a hall)
دھليز dihlīz pl. دھاليز dahālīz   anteroom, vestibule, lobby, foyer; corridor, hall-way
ابناء الدھاليز pl. ad-d. ibn ابن الدھليز│
foundling
دھلي dihlī Delhi
دھم dahama a (dahm) and dahima a (daham) to come or descend (ه upon s.o.) suddenly; to surprise, take unawares, take by surprise (ه s.o.), come unexpectedly (ه to s.o.); to enter suddenly, raid, invade (ھ s.th.) II to blacken (ه s.th.) III to befall, seize, grip, attack (ه s.o.), come over s.o. ( ه; e.g., sickness, despair); to surprise, take unawares, catch red-handed (ه s.o.); to attack suddenly (ه s.o.), fall upon s.o. (ه), invade, raid (ه e.g., a house); to overtake (ه s.o.; fate), catch up with (ه) IX to be black
دھمة duhma blackness
ادھم adham , f. دھماء dahmā’  , pl. دھم duhm black, deep-black │دھماء داھية (dahiya) disaster, catastrophe
الدھماء ad-dahmā’   the masses, the common people, the populace, also دھماء الناس
مداھمة mudāhama police raid; house search
مدھم mudhamm very dark, pitch-dark
دھن dahana u (dahn) to oil (ھ ه، s.th., s.o., ب with); to anoint (ھ ه، s.th., s.o., ب with); to grease, smear (ھ ب، s.th., s.o., ب with); to rub, embrocate (ھ ه، s.th., s.o., ب with); to paint, daub (ه s.th.); to varnish (ھ s.th.) II do. III to treat with gentleness (ه s.o.); to cajole, flatter (ه s.o.), fawn (ه on s.o.); to cheat, dupe, gull, take in, outsmart (ه s.o.)
V pass. of I
دھن dahn oiling, greasing; painting, daubing
 duhūn, دھون adhān, ادھان pl. duhn دھن
-āt, دھان dihān oil (edible, lubricating, for the skin); fat, grease
دھن duhnī oily, oil, oleic, oleo- (in compounds); fatty, greasy
دھنيات duhnīyāt fats, oils; fatty substances
دھناء dahnā’ desert
دھان dahhān house painter, painter
دھينة dahīna pomade 296
دھان dihān pl. -āt, ادھنة adhina cosmetic cream, cold cream, salve, ointment, unguent; consecrated oil, anointing oil; paint, varnish; hypocrisy, dissimulation, deceit; -- (without pl.) painting, daubing; whitewashing │ للدھان ورشة (warša) paintshop
مداھنة mudāhana flattery, adulation, sycophancy, fawning; hypocrisy, dissimulation; deceit, trickery
مداھن mudāhin flatterer, adulator, sycophant; hypocrite
مدھن mudhin oily; fatty, greasy
دھور dahwara to hurl down (ھ s.th.); to tear down, topple, overthrow (ھ s.th.) II tadahwara pass. of I; to fall, tumble; to slump, sink; to be dragged down, sink to the lowest level
تدھور tadahwur fall, downfall; decline, slump
دھي dahiya a (دھاء dahā’) to be clever, smart, cunning, artful, wily; -- dahā a to befall, overtake, hit, strike (ه s.o.), come over s.o. (ه; misfortune) II = dahā VI to pretend to be smart or cunning
دھاء dahā’ smartness, slyness, shrewdness, subtlety, cunning, craft
ادھى adhā smarter, shrewder; craftier, wilier; more skillful, subtler, more resourceful; worse, more calamitous
داه dāhin pl. دھاة duhāh smart, sly, shrewd, subtle, cunning, wily, artful; resourceful person
داھية dāhiya smart fellow, old fox, sly dog
داھية dāhiya pl. دواه dawāhin calamity, disaster, catastrophe │دھياء داھية (dahyā’) and دھماء داھية (dahmā’) disaster, catastrophe; داھية في فليذھب (fal-yadhab) let him go to hell!
دوء) داء) dā’ pl. ادواء adwā’ disease, malady │ الثعلب داء d. at-ta‘lab alopecia, loss of the hair; O الرقص داء d. ar-raqṣ St. Vitus’s dance; O الفيل داء d. al-fīl elephantiasis; داء المنطقة d. al-minṭaqa shingles, herpes zoster (med.)
دوى see دواء
دوب II to wear out, wear off (ھ s.th.)
دوبرة dūbara packthread, string, twine, cord, rope; thread
دوبيت dūbait a rhymed poem consisting of four hemistichs
دوح VII to spread
دوح dauḥ branching trees, branches
دوحة dauḥa tall tree with many branches; family tree, genealogical table
داحة dāḥa top (child’s toy)
دوخ) داخ) dāka u (dauk) to conquer, subjugate ( الى a. country); to resign o.s., humble o.s.; to be or become dizzy, have a feeling of dizziness; to feel ill, be sick, feel nausea II to conquer, subjugate (ھ a people); to make submissive, subdue, humble, humiliate, degrade (ه s.o.); to make (ه s.o.) dizzy; to molest, bother, trouble (ه s.o.); to daze, stun (ه s.o.) │رأسه دوخ (ra’sahū) to make s.o.’s head go round, make s.o. dizzy
دوخة dauka vertigo, dizziness; coma; nausea
دائخ dā’ik dizzy
تدويخ tadwīk subjugation, conquest
  دود II to be or become worm-eaten
dīdān ديدان pl. )ة un. n. (coll.; dūd دود دودة │ caterpillar larva; maggot; worm; دود silkworm; al-qazz d. دود القز and الحرير ascarids; (qar‘ī) دود قرعي al-qar‘, d. القرع دود المش cochineal; al-qirmiz d. دود القرمز الدودة الوحيدة maggots; cheese al-mišš d. ٧٩٢ tapeworm
 دودي dūdī wormlike, worm-shaped, vermiform.
مدود madūd, mudawwid wormy, worm- eaten
مذود = midwad مدود  □
دور) دار) dāra u (daur, دوران dawarān)to turn, revolve, rotate, move in a circle (على، حول ,ب around s.th. or s.o.), circle (على، حول ب، s.th. or s.o.); to begin to turn or rotate; to circulate; to go round, spread, be current, make the rounds (of rumors, etc.); to run, be in operation (of a machine or engine); to start running, start up (engine); to walk or go about, run around; to roam, rove, move about, wander about, gad about; to make the rounds (على among people), turn successively (على to several people); to turn, turn one’s face, wheel around; to veer, shift, change its direction; to change, take a different turn, become different; to turn (على against s.o.); to have to do, deal ( حول or على with), treat (حول or على of), refer (حول or على to), bear (حول or على on), concern (حول or على s.th.); to take place, be going on, be in progress, be under way; to be discussed, be talked about (بين among); to circulate, pass around (ب s.th.); to lead, guide or &how around (ب s.o.); to let roam, let wander (بعينه بنظره، bi-naẓarihī,
bi-‘ainaihi one’s eyes, one’s glance, في over) │در dur! about face! (command; mil.); رأسه دار (ra’suhū) to be or become dizzy, giddy; الفرص مع دار (furaṣ) to trim sail, adapt o.s. to the situation; الحرب رحى دارت (raḥā l-ḥarb) war broke out; رحالھا دارت التي المعارك امس the battles that raged yesterday; دار بنفسه (bi-nafsihī) it passed through his mind; األلسن على دار (alsun) to be much- discussed, be on everyone’s lips; دار األقالم واسالت األفواه على (afwāh, asalāt
al-aqlāmi to be current in both the spoken and written language, be in general use, be generally accepted (e.g., words); اعيادا واكل بالدا دار (bilādan, a‘yādan) he had bean around in the world and had seen a lot; (colloq.) باله دار (bālahū) to pay attention (على الى، to), be careful (الى،
على with); الدائرة عليھم دارت calamity overtook them II to turn in a circle, spin, whirl, rotate, revolve (ھ ب، s.th.); to turn, turn around (ھ ب، s.th.); to invert, reverse (ھ ب، s.th.); to make round, to round (ھ s.th.); to circulate, pass around (ھ s.th.); to set going, set in motion, start (ھ s.th.); to wind (ھ a watch, a clock); to look, search (على for s.th.) │رأسه دور (ra’sahū) to turn s.o.’s head, persuade s.o., bring s.o. round III to go or walk around (ه with s.o.); to try to bring (ه s.o.) round; to ensnare, inveigle (ه s.o.); to try to ensnare (ه s.o.); to try to deceive (ه s.o.); to cheat, trick (على or ه عن s.o. out of s.th.); to get away, escape, dodge, duck out IV to turn, revolve, rotate, spin, whirl (ب ,ھ s.th.); to turn around, turn (ب ھ، s.th., الى رأسه one’s head toward); to direct (على or ھ الى s.th. to, toward), aim (على or ھ الى s.th. at); to circulate, pass around (ھ s.th.); to set in operation, set going, set in motion ( ھ a machine, an apparatus); to start, start up (المحرك al-muḥarrik the motor); to play, play back (ھ e.g.,
ناطقة شرائط tapes); to act upon s.th. (ھ), drive (ھ s.th.); to get under way (ھ a job, a project); to take up (ھ s.th.); to initiate (ھ s.th.); to divert, turn away ( ه ,ھ عن s.o., s.th. from); to direct, conduct, steer, manage, head, run (ھ s.th.), be in charge (ھ of); to revolve in one’s mind, think over, ponder (ھ s.th., ان that) │الى بوجھه ادار (bi-wajhihī) to turn around to s.o., look back at s.o.; رأسه ادار (ra’sahū) to turn s.o.’s head, persuade s.o., bring s.o. round; ادار الموضوع في الحديث to bring 298 conversation around to a topic, broach or discuss a subject V to be or become round; to be circular X do.; to circle, rotate, revolve, spin, turn; to turn (الى to), face (الى s.o.); to turn around; to turn one’s head, look back; to circle ( حول s.th.), walk around s.th. (~حول)
دار dār f., pl. دور dūr, ديار diyār, ديارات diyārāt, ديرة diyara house; building, structure, edifice; habitation, dwelling, abode; residence, home; seat, side, locality; area, region; land, country (esp. pl. ديار see below │اآلثار دار museum (of
 antiquities); البريد دار post office; البقاء دار d. al-baqā’ the eternal abode, the hereafter; الباقية الدار (bāqiya) do.; الباقية للدار انتقل to pass away, die; البيضاء دار ال (baiḍā’) Casablanca (seaport in W Morocco); the White House (in Washington); التجارة دار commercial house, business house; دار الحرب d. al-ḥarb war zone, enemy territory (Isl. Law: non-Muslim countries); دار الرياسة seat of the chief executive of a country; السعادة دار d. as-sa‘āda Constantinople; السلطنة دار d. as-salṭana Constantinople (designation before World War I); السالم دار d. as-salām paradise, heaven; epithet of Baghdad; Dar es Salaam (seaport and capital of Tanganyika Territory); السينما دور cinemas, movie houses; السلطة دار d. aš-šurṭa police station; الصنعة دار or الصناعة دار arsenal; صيني دار (ṣīnī) cinnamon; الضرب دار d. aḍ-ḍarb and السكة دار d. as-sikka mint (building); الديار العراقية (‘irāqīya) Iraq; العلوم دار name of a college in Cairo; الفناء دار d. al-fanā’ (as opposed to البقاء دار see above) the temporal world, this world; القضاء دار d. al- qaḍā’ court of justice, tribunal; الكتب دار d. al-kutub public library; اللھو دور d. al-lahw amusement centers; night clubs; التمثيل دار theater, playhouse; الملك دار d. al-mulk (royal) residence; المصرية الديار (miṣrīya) Egypt; الھجرة دار d. al-hijra Medina; دار األيتام d. al-aitām orphanage, orphans’ home
دارة dāra pl. -āt halo (of the moon); circle; O (el.) circuit; O villa
دارى dārī domestic, native
دورى dūrī domestic (animal); عصفور دوري (‘uṣfūr) and دوري house sparrow
دور daur pl. ادوار adwār round (of a patrol; in sports); role, part (played by s.o. or s.th.); film role, stage role; periodic change, rotation, alternation; crop rotation; period; (one’s) turn; phase, stage, step, degree, station; epoch, age. era; fit, attack, paroxysm (of a disease); floor, story; musical composition; number, single performance (within a program) │ وتسلسل دور (wa-tasalsul) vicious circle, circulus vitiosus; نھائي دور (nihā’ī) final round, finals (athlet.); االنعقاد دور d. al- in‘iqād session, term (parl.); األول الدور (awwal) or البطولة دور d. al-buṭūla leading
role, starring role; بدور قام or دورا لعب (la‘iba) to play a part or role; ارضي دور (arḍī) ground floor, first floor; دوره كان it was his turn; له الدور it is his turn; ((انا بدوري I for one; (I) for my part, (بدوره (ھو he in turn, (he) for his part; بالدور alternately, by turns
دورة daura pl. -āt turn, revolution, gyration, rotation; circulation; cycle; circuit; round, patrol; procession (Chr.); round trip; tour (in general, of an artist or performer); detour; period (O also el.); session (of parliament); course (of instruction) (ir., syr.) │الدموية الدورة (damawīya) blood circulation; الجوية الدورة (jawwīya) air circulation; (تجاوز) اجتياز دورة الرتبة d. ijtiyāz (tajāwuz) ar-rutba officers’ training course (mil., Syr.); زراعية دورة (zirā‘īya) crop rotation; تشريعية دورة (tašrī‘īya) legislative period; الفلك دورة d. al-falak revolution of celestial bodies; دورة التفافية (iltifāfīya) flanking maneuver (mil.); مالية دورة (mālīya) 299 financial period, fiscal year; المياه دورة d. al-miyāh lavatory (with running water), toilet, water closet
دوري daurī patrolling, patrol- (in compounds); periodic, occurring at regular stated times, recurring, intermittent; circulatory, cyclic, etc., see دور and دورة series (athlet.) الدوري الجھاز (jahāz) the circulatory system
دورية daurīya pl. -āt patrol, round; patrol, reconnaissance squad │دوريات االستكشاف reconnaissance squads, patrols
daurīya دورية = dāwirīya داورية □
ديورة adyira, اديرة adyār, اديار pl. dair دير
duyūra monastery, convent, cloister
ديري dairī monastic, ministerial, cloistral
ديرة dīra region, area, land, homeland (bedouin)
دوار duwār, dawār vertigo, dizziness, giddiness; seasickness
دوار dawwār rapidly or constantly turning, whirling, spinning, rotating, circling, circulating; revolving, rotary, rotatory; whirlpool, eddy, vortex; itinerant, ambulant, roving; (eg.) farm building, farm │دوار باب revolving door;
 دوار بائع peddler, hawker; دوار حفر جھاز (jahāz ḥafr) rotary drilling rig; الشمس دار d. aš-šams sunflower
ديار dayyār monastic, friar, monk
ديرانى dairānī monastic, friar, monk
دوارة dawwāra whirlpool, eddy, vortex; compass, pair of dividers (syr.) │O دوارة الھواء d. al-hawā’ weather vane
دياري diyārī domestic; native
دوران dawarān turn(ing), rotation, revolution, gyration; circulation, circling, circuiting; round trip, tour
ادور adwar  (elative): األلسن على ادور (alsun) more talked about, more frequently expressed or discussed
مدار madār pl. -āt orbit; circling, circuiting, circuit, revolution; axis; pivot; (fig.) that upon which s.th. turns or depends, the central, cardinal, or crucial factor, the pivot; center; subject, topic, theme (of a conversation, of negotiations); scope, range, extent, sphere; tropic (geogr.); O steering wheel │السرطان مدار
m. as-saraṭān Tropic of Cancer, الجدي مدار
m. al-jady Tropic of Capricorn; مداره كان على it (i.e., the dispute, or the like) was about ..., it hinged on ...; السنة مدار على (m. is-sana) throughout the year, all year round
تدوير tadwīr recitation of the Koran at medium speed (between tartīl and ḥadr; a technical term of tajwīd)
مداورة mudāwara pl. -āt cheating, humbug, trickery; outwitting; attempted evasion or circumvention, shift, dodge; persuasion, inveigling, ensnaring
ادارة idāra turning; turning around or over, reverting, reversion, inversion; starting, setting in operation; operation; drive (techn.); direction, management; administration; administrative agency, department, office, bureau │األمن ادارة i. al-amn the police; عرفية ادارة (‘urfīya)
military administration; اإلدارة سوء sū’ al-i. mismanagement, maladministmtion; مجلس اإلدارة Majlis al-i. board of directors, administrative board, committee of management; اإلدارة مرنز markaz al-i. administration center, headquarters
اداري idārī administrative, departmental; administrative officer; manager (athlet.); اداريا idāriyan through administrative channels, administratively, officially
استدارة istidāra roundness, rotundity, circularity
دائر dā’ir turning, revolving, spinning; circulating; current (e.g., expression), common; ambulant, itinerant; in progress, 300 under way j working, in operation; running (machine, engine); round
دائرة dā’ira pl. دوائر dawā’ir  circle (also math.); ring; circumference, perimeter, periphery; sphere, scope, range, compass, extent, circuit; field, domain (fig.); official agency, department (esp. Ir., Syr., Leb.); office, bureau; department of a court of justice (Eg., Tun.); farm, country estate (eg.); misfortune, calamity, affliction │في دائرة ... within the framework of ...; شكل على دائرة نصف ‘alā šakli niṣfi d. semicircular; الدائرة نقطة nuqṭat ad-d. essential factor, pivot, crucial point, crux; O كھربائية دائرة (kahrabā’īya) electric circuit; O قصيرة دائرة short circuit (el.); المعارف دائرة encyclopedia; الحكومة دوائر government circles, العسكرية السياسية،) الرسمية الدوائر) (rasmīya, siyāsīya, ‘askarīya) official (political, military) circles or quarters (journ.); االختصاص دائرة jurisdiction (of an official agency, esp., of a court of justice); السنية الدائرة (sanīya) civil list; استئنافية دائرة (isti’nāfīya) appellate court (Eg.; jur.); انتخابية دائرة (intikābīya) electoral district; الدوائر عليه دارت to suffer adversities
دائري dā’irī circular, ring-shaped, annular
مدور mudawwar round, circular
مدير mudīr head, chief, director; administrator; manager; intendant, superintendent; rector (of a university); mudir, chief officer of a mudiria, approx.
= governor (Eg.); (pl. مدراء mudarā’ ) administrative officer at the head of a county (Syr., Leb., Ir., Saudi Ar.) │ مدير الجوق m. al-jauq bandleader, conductor of an orchestra
مديرة mudīra directress; administratress
 مديرية mudīrīya direction; administration; management; -- (pl. -āt) mudiria, province (Eg.); approx.: main department of a ministry (Ir.)
مستدير mstadīr round; circular │مؤتمر المستديرة المائدة (mu’tamar al-mā’idat al-m.) roundtable conference
دورق dauraq pl. دوارق dawāriq  (eg.) bulging vessel with a long, slender neck, carafe
دوزن dauzana to tune (a musical instrument); O to tune in (radio)
دوزان dūzān and دوزنة dauzana tuning (of a musical instrument); دوزنة O tuning (radio)
دوزينة (It. dozzina) dōzīna dozen
دوس) داس) dāsa u (daus, دياس diyās) to tread, step (ھ on); to tread (ھ s.th.); to tread down, trample down, trample underfoot, crush (ھ s.th.); to thresh (grain); to treat with disdain, humiliate (ه s.o.); to run over (ه s.o.; automobile) VII pass. of I
دوس daus treading, trampling, tread, step
ديسة dīsa dense forest, jungle, thicket
دواسة dawwāsa pedal
مداس madās shoe, sandal
مدوس madūs, مداس mudās trodden, trampled down; crushed; run over
dysenteryدوسنتاريا  dusinṭāriyā, دوسنطاريا -āt pl. dōsē دوسيه dosyē, dossier) (Fr. دوسية
dossier, file
 دوش (eg.) dawaš to irritate (ه s.o.) or drive s.o. crazy by noise
دوشة dauša (eg.) din, noise, clamor, uproar, hubbub, hullabaloo
  دوش(Fr. douche) dūš pl. -āt shower, douche
دوطة (It. dote) dōṭa dowry
دوغ II to imprint a mark, to brand
داغ dāg pl. -āt brand (on cattle) 301
دوف) داف) dāfa u (dauf) to mix, mingle (ھ في
s.th. with); to add, admix (ھ في s.th. to)
دوق dūq duke
دوقة dūqa duchess
دوقي dūqī ducal
دوقية dūqīya dukedom, duchy
دوك II to chatter, prattle
دوك dauka din, row, hubbub, turnult, confusion
 دول) دال) dāla u" (دولة daula) to change periodically, take turns, alternate, rotate; to change, turn (time, fortune) │دولة دالت االستبداد the time of absolutism is over, belongs to the past; الدولة له دالت fortune has turned in his favor (عليه against him) III to alternate, rotate (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to cause to succeed by turns or to follow one another (األيام al-ayyāma the days; God); to alternate (بين between); to confer, talk (ه with s.o., في about), discuss (ه في with s.o. s.th.) IV to give ascendancy, afford superiority, give the upper hand (ه من to
s.o. over); to make victorious, let triumph (ه على s.o. over), grant victory (ه على to s.o. over); to replace (ھ ب or من s.th. with), exchange, substitute (ھ ب or من for s.th. s.th.) │امية بني من العباس لبني اديل udīla li- banī 1-‘abbās min banī umayyata the rule passed from the Ommaiads to the Abbasides VI to alternate, take turns (ھ with or in s.th., e.g., in some work); to hand each other s.th. (ھ), pass s.th. (ھ) alternately between themselves; to handle alternately (ھ different things), take now this, now that; to exchange (الرأى ar-ra’y views); to make frequent use (ھ of s.th.); to confer, have a discussion, take counsel, deliberate; to parley, negotiate; to circulate, be in circulation, be current, have currency │األيدي تداولته tadāwalathu l- aidī it passed from hand to hand, it made the rounds, it circulated; األلسن تداولته (alsun) it passed from mouth to mouth, it was the talk of the town, it was on everybody’s lips
دولة daula pl. دول duwal alternation, rotation, change; change of time, turn of fortune; dynasty; state, country; power, empire │الدولة صاحب title of the Prime Minister; الحكومة رئيس دولة daulat r. al-ḥ. His Excellency, the Prime Minister; فخامة الدولة fakāmat ad-d. title of the President of the Republic (Syr., Leb.); العلية الدولة (‘alīya) name of the ancient Ottoman Empire; العظمى) الكبرى الدول) (kubrā, ‘uẓmā)
 the big powers; منتدبة دولة (muntadaba) mandatory power
دولة (dam., pronounced dōle = ركوة rakwa) metal vessel with long curved handle used for making coffee
دولي daulī state (adj.); duwalī
international
دولية duwalīya internationality; internationalism; the International
دويالت duwailāt petty states, small countries
دواليك dawālaika alternately, by turns; successively, one by one, one after the other │دواليك وھكذا (wa-hākadā) and so forth, and so on
تدويل tadwīl internationalization
مداولة mudāwala pl. -āt parley, negotiation; deliberation, consultation; discussion; mudāwalatan alternately, one after the other, one at a time
تداول tadāwul alternation, rotation; circulation, currency; circulation of money │بالتداول alternately, by turns, one by one
متداول mutadāwal current, circulating, in circulation; valid; common, in common use, prevailing │المتداول الكالم (kalām) the colloquial language 302
دول see dawālin دوال 
دوالب dūlāb pl. دواليب dawālīb  wheel; tire; gearing, gears, wheels, mechanism, machine, machinery; closet, looker, cabinet, cupboard │المالبس دوالب wardrobe
دوالر dūlār pl. -āt dollar
 دوم) دام) dāma u (daum, دوام dawām) to last, continue, go on; to persevere, persist │ ما دام mā dāma as long as; (the more so) since, inasmuch as, as, because; while he is ..., when he is ... ; حيا دام ما (ḥayyan) as long as he is alive; معك دمت ما (dumtu) so long as (or while) I am with you II to move in a circle, turn, spin, revolve, rotate, gyrate, circle; to turn, revolve, spin, twirl (ھ s.th.) III to persevere, persist (على in), apply o.s. diligently and steadily (على to), pursue with diligence and perseverance (على s.th.); to continue IV to cause to last or continue, perpetuate, make
lasting, make permanent (ھ s.th.) X to make (ھ s.th.) last or continue; to continue, go on (ھ with s.th.)
دوم daum continuance, permanence, duration; دوما dauman constantly, at all times, ever, always; -- doom palm (bot.)
duyūm ديوم diyam, ديم pl. dīma ديمة
continuous rain
دوام dawām duration, continuance, permanence, perpetuity; uninterrupted succession; endurance, perseverance; abiding, stay (of s.o., في at a place); دواما dawāman and الدوام على permanently, perpetually, at all times, ever, always │ الدوام ساعات الدوام، اوقات الدوام، وقت working hours, office hours (Ir., Syr.)
دوام = daimūma ديمومة
دوامة duwwāma top (child’s toy); whirlpool, eddy, vortex
مداومة mudāwama perseverance, endurance, persistence; continuance, duration; continuation
دائم dā’im lasting, enduring; endless, eternal, perpetual, everlasting; perennial; continued, continuous, continual, incessant, unceasing, constant; permanent, standing, established; durable │التقدم دائم والنمو d. at-taqaddum in a state of constant progress and growth
دائما dā’iman always │ابدا دائما (abadan) always and ever
دائم = dā’imī دائمي wine mudām مدام
مستديم mustadīm constant, continuous, continual, incessant, uninterrupted
 دومان dūmān rudder, helm
دومانجي dūmānjī steersman, helmsman
 دون II to record, write down, set down, put down in writing (ھ s.th.); to enter, list, register, book (ھ s.th.); to collect (ھ poems) │شرطا دون (šarṭan) to stipulate a condition V to be recorded, be written down, be put down in writing
ديوان dīwān pl. دواوين dawāwīn  account books of the treasury (in the older Islamic administration); divan, collection of poems written by one author;
 governmental office, administrative office; chancellery, office, bureau, secretariat; council or state, cabinet; council, consultative assembly, board of advisers, executive committee; government; court or justice, tribunal; hall; davenport, divan; (railway) compartment │الدواوين لغة lugat ad-d. official jargon, officialese; التفتيش ديوان inquisitional court; the Inquisition
ديواني dīwānī administrative, administrational, official; an Ottoman style of cursive (used by the secretaries of the State Chancellery for treaties, diplomas, firmans, etc.)
تدوين tadwīn recording, writing down; entry, listing. booking; registering, registration 303
مدونة mudawwana pl. -āt record, note; entry: body of laws; pl. مدونات writings, literature (on a given subject)
 دون dūn low, lowly; bad, poor, inferior; meager, inadequate │ بالدون عامله (‘āmalahū) he snubbed him
دون dūna (prep.) below, beneath, under (in rank, value, etc.); this side of, short of; before; without more than; with the exclusion of, leaving ... aside, disregarding ...; and not by any means, but not │ ذلك دون (with foll. nominative) on the way to that, there is ... , before accomplishing that one must …, ذلك دون القتاد خرط (karṭ al-qatad) before one can do that, one must strip the tragacanth of its leaves, i.e., accomplish the impossible; دون من بدون، (dūni) without; with the exclusion of, excluding; ان بدون and دون من ان without (+ foll. gerund in Engl.); دونك dūnaka (with foll. acc.) here you are!
take ...! watch out (ھ for)! beware (ھ of)! دون ھو he is below him, he doesn’t measure up to him; أھمية دونه كان (ahammīyatan) to be of less importance than ...; اثم كل دونه اثم itmun dūnahū kullu itmin a sin to end all sins; السن دون ھم الذين العسكرية (sinn, ‘askarīya) those below the age for military service; الى نظر ما دون (naẓarin) regardless of, irrespective of; فائدة ما دون with no benefit at all; completely useless; دونھا يسعدن ان تخشى (takšā an yas‘adna) she is afraid they will
be happier than she is; غيرھا دون الكتب تلك (kutub, gairihā) those books and no others; علمك دون فضلك من متعجب ان (muta‘ajjib, faḍlika, ‘ilmika) I admire your virtue, but not your knowledge, or, I admire your virtue more than your knowledge; والشكوى التذمر دون دون األفواه كم (kamma, tadammur, šakwā) he stopped their mouths to keep them from muttering and complaining; يحتمله ما دون الغصن كان اذا (guṣnu, yaḥtamiluhū) if the branch is not strong enough to carry him; الى دونھم وصل الغايةit was he, not they, who reached the goal; دونه بوجھھا اشاحت (ašāḥat· bi-wajhihā) she averted her face so that he could not see her; الشيء دون حال to prevent s.th.; األشعة الحمراء دون (aši‘‘a, ḥamrā‘) the infrared rays; القصيرة دون الموجات (maujāt) ultra- short waves (radio)
دونم dūnum a square measure (Ir. = about 2500 m ; Pal. = roughly, 900 m )
 دوى dawā and II to sound, resound, ring out; to drone; to echo, reverberate III to treat (ه a patient, ھ a disease) VI to treat o.s. (with a medicine); to be cured
دوى dawan pl. ادواء adwā’ sickness, illness, disease, malady
دوي dawīy sound, noise, ring, clang, roar, thunder, drone; echo, reverberation
دوي pl. dawāya) دواية (□ dawāh دواة
duwīy, diwīy, دويات dawayāt inkwell
دواء dawā’ pl. ادوية adwiya remedy, medicament, medication, medicine, drug
دوائي dawd'i medicinal, medicative, curative
دوء see داء
دواء diwā’ treatment, therapy (med.)
مداواة mudāwāh treatment, therapy (med.)
تداو tadāwin cure
 دوى (Fr. douille) dūy socket (of a light bulb) ديالوج diyalōg (Eg. spelling) pl. -āt dialogue ديباج and ديباجة see دبج
ديوث dayyūt (□ ديوس) cuckold; procurer, pimp; a variety of warbler (zool.)
دجر see ديجور
 الديجوليون ad-dēgōlīyūn (Eg. spelling) the Gaullists 304
ديدبان daidabān, daidubān pl. -āt, ديادبة dayādiba guard, sentry: sentinel │ديدبان المراكب ship’s pilot
ددن see ديدن
دور see دير، ديرة، اديار، اديرة، ديرى، ديار، ديراني bot.) tenax; (Ampelodesma diss dīs ديس دسم see ديسم
ديسمبر disembir, disambir December
ديك dīk pl. ديكة dīka, ديوك duyūk, ادياك adyāk cock, rooster │الحبش ديك d. al-kabaš turkey, turkey cock; رومي ديك (rūmī) do.; الديك وزن wazn ad-d. bantam weight
الديكي السعال as-su‘āl ad-dīkī whooping cough
ديكتاتوري = دكتاتوري
ديكور (Fr. décor) pl. -āt décor, stage decoration
دياميس pl. daimūs ديموس dīmās, daimās, ديماس
dayāmīs  dungeon, vault
دوم see ديمة، ديم، ديمومة
ديموطيقي dīmūṭīqī demotic (writing)
democratic; dimuqrāṭī ديموقراطي، ديمقراطي democrat
ديمقراطية ,ديموقراطية dimuqrāṭīya pl. -āt democracy; democratic attitude or conviction
  دين) دان) dāna i to borrow, take up a loan; to be a debtor, be indebted; to owe (ل ب s.o. s.th., also, e.g., بالشكر له دان (šukr) d. lahū bi-š-šukr to owe s.o. one’s thanks; ب s.th., e.g., بالحياة bi-l-ḥayāh one’s life, ل to s.th. or s.o.); to be indebted (ل ب to s.o. for); to be subject, subject o.s., bow, yield, (ل to
s.o. or s.th.), be under s.o.’s (ل) power, owe allegiance (ل to s.o.), obey (ل s.o.); to grant a loan, lend money (ه to s.o.); to subject, subjugate (ه s.o.): to requite, repay (ه s.o.): to condemn (ه s.o.), pass judgment (ه on s.o.) III to have a debt (ه with s.o.), be indebted (ه to s.o.): to be the creditor (ه of s.o.), have a money claim (ه on s.o.) │ قروش خمسة بمبلغ داينه (bi-mablag kamsat q.) he had a claim of five piasters on him IV to lend money (ه to s.o.): to sell on credit ( ه to s.o.); to convict, find guilty,
pronounce guilty (ه s.o.) V to be indebted, have debts; to subject o.s. (ل to) VI تداينوا بدين (dain) to contract a mutual loan, borrow money from each other X to make or incur debts, take up a loan
دين dain pl. ديون duyūn debt; pecuniary obligation, liability: obligation (Isl. Law); claim (Isl. Law), financial claim │بالدين on credit; الدين رب rabb ad-d. creditor; ديون الحرب d. al-ḥarb war debts: مضمون دين bonded, or funded, debt; ممتاز دين (mumtāz) preferred, or privileged, debt; موحد دين (muwaḥḥlad) consolidated debt; مطلق دين (muṭlaq) debt not bound to the physical person of the debtor, but outliving him (Isl. Law); مستغرق دين (mustagriq) claims against an estate which exceed or equal the assets (Isl. Law)
دينونة dainūna judgment; Last Judgment
الديان ad-dayyān the Judge (attribute of God)
مدينة madīna pl. مدائن madā’in , مدن mudun town, city; المدينة Medina (city in W Saudi Arabia); see مدن
ادانة idāna verdict of guilty: conviction
│بإدانته الحكم صدر ṣadara l-ḥukmu bi- idānatihī he was convicted
استدانة istidāna incurrence of debts
دائن dā’in creditor
مديون madyūn indebted, in debt: obligated, under obligation 305
مديونية madyūnīya indebtedness obligation
مدين madīn owing; indebted, obligated, under obligation; debtor │بالشكر مدين (šukr) owing gratitude, much obliged; ل مدينا كان to be indebted to s.o., stand in s.o.’s debt
مدين mudīn moneylender, creditor
مدان mudān convicted, found guilty; guilty; judged, condemned
 دين) دان) dāna i to profess (ب a religion, a conviction. etc.) │ باإلسالم دان to profess Islam; بعاداته دان (bi-‘ādātihī) to adhere to one’s customs V to profess (ب a religion)
دين dīn pl. اديان adyān religion, creed, faith, belief │الدين يوم yaum ad-d. the Day of Judgment
 ديني dīnī religious; spiritual │الديني ir- religious; O الديني العلم science of religion
دين dayyin religious, pious, godly, devout
ديانة diyāna pl. -āt religion; communion, confession, denomination, sect │الديانة صاحب founder of a religion
ديان dayyān pious, godly, devout, religious
تدين tadayyun piety, godliness, devoutness, religiousness, religiosity
متدين mutadayyin pious, godly, devout, religious
متدينة mutadayyina religious community
دينار pl. دنانير danānīr  dinar, a monetary unit (Ir., Jord.); pl. دنانير money
ديناري dīnārī diamonds (of a deck of cards)
دينامو dīnāmō dynamo, generator
ديناميت dīnāmīt dynamite
O دينم dainam pl. ديانم dayānim  dynamo, generator
ودى see دية
دون  see ديواني and دواوين pl. ديوان

ذ
ذا (demonstr. pron.) pl. اوالء ulā’i this one, this; بذا bi-dā by this, by this means, thereby; لذا li-dā therefore; كذا ka-dā so, thus, in this manner; so and so, so and so much; ھكذا hā-ka-dā so, thus, in this manner; serves as intensifier after interrogative pronouns (roughly corresponding in English to such phrase as: ... on earth, ... then, or the like): ماذا what on earth? لماذا why then? why in heaven’s name? – ذا ھو huwa dā, f. ذي ھي hiya dī that one; look at that one; why, that is ..., now if that isn’t ...!; ھاءنذا hā’anadā behold, it is I, here I am, pl. ھا اوالء نحن hā naḥnu ulā’i; -- used as an accusative in the construct state: master, owner, or possessor of, with ذو nominative (q.v.), ذي as genitive; -- ذاك dāka, f. تاك tāka, تيك tīka, pl. اوالئك ulā’ika this, this one; ذاك اذ (id) then, at that time; in those days; -- ذلك dālika f. تلك tilka, pl. اوالئك
ulā’ika that, that one; بذلك bi-dālika by that, by that means, in that manner; لذلك li- dālika therefore; ذلك بعد ba‘da dālika after that, upon that, thereafter, thereupon; مع ذلك ma‘a dālika yet, still, 306 nevertheless, for all that; ان وذلك (anna) that is (to say), namely, to wit; ألن وذلك (li-anna) and that is because ..., for the one reason that ...;
بأن ذلك (bi-anna) this is due to the fact that ...; كذلك ka-dālika so, thus, in that manner; equally, likewise, in the lame manner; -- ذلكم dālikum f. تلكم tilkum, pl. اوالئكم ulā’ikum that one; -- ھذا hādā f. ھذه
hādihī, ھذي hādī, pl. ھؤالء hā’ulā’I, dual m. ھذان hādāni, f. ھاتان hātāni this, this one, see ھذا (alphabetically)
ذأب X to be wolflike, be fierce or cruel like a wolf
ذئب di‘b pl. ذئاب di’āb, ذؤبان du’bān dieb (Canis anthus), jackal; wolf │ الذئب مرض األحمر maraḍ ad-d. al-aḥmar name of a noncontiguous skin disease
ذؤابة du’āba pl. ذوائب dawā’ib  lock, strand (of hair); tuft, wisp
ذو see ذاتية and ذات، ذاتي ذا see ذا
ذال dāl name of the letter ذ
ذب dabba u to drive away, chase away (ه ھ،
s.o., s.th.); to defend (عن s.o., s.th.)
ذباب dubāb (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. اذبة adibba, ذبان dibbān flies, fly │ قارض ذباب gadfly, horsefly
ذبابة dubāba pl. -āt (n. un. of ذباب) fly; tip (of the sword, or the like)
ذبانة dubbāna, dibbāna fly; sight, bead (on a firearm)
مذبة midabba fly whisk, fly swatter
ذبح dabaḥa a (dabḥ) to kill (by slitting the throat); to slaughter, butcher; to massacre; to murder, slay; to sacrifice, offer up, immolate (ھ an animal) II to kill, slaughter, butcher, massacre, murder
ذبح dabḥ slaughtering, slaughter
ذبح dibḥ sacrificial victim, blood sacrifice
ذبحة dibḥa, dubḥa angina (med.); diphtheria │ الصدرية الذبحة (ṣadrīya) angina
 (fu’ādīya) الذبحة الفؤادية O (med.); pectoris do.
ذباح dabbāḥ slaughtering, killing, murdering; slaughterer, butcher
ذبيح dabīḥ slaughtered
ذبيحة dabīḥa pl. ذبائح dabā’iḥ  slaughter animal; sacrificial victim, blood sacrifice; sacrifice, immolation; offering, oblation
madābiḥ  مذابح pl. madbaḥ مذبح
slaughterhouse; altar (Chr.)
مذبحة madbaḥa massacre, slaughter, carnage, butchery
ذبذب dabdaba to set into a swinging motion, swing, dangle (ھ s.th.) II tadabdaba to swing, pendulate; to oscillate (el.); to be deflected (magnetic needle); to vibrate; to fluctuate; to waver, vacillate, hesitate
ذبذبة dabdaba pl. -āt pendulous motion, pendulation; oscillation (el.); vibration
تذبذب tadabdaba pendulous motion, pendulation, swinging; oscillation (el.); deflection (of a magnetic needle)
O مذبذب mudabdib oscillator (el.)
مذبذب mudabdab fluctuating, variable; vacillating, wavering, hesitant, unsteady
متذبذب mutadabdib: متذبذب تيار (tayyār) oscillating current (el.)
ذبل dabala, dabula u (dabl, ذبول dubūl) to be wilted, to wilt, wither; to fade; to become dry, dry up; to waste away; to become dull, lose its luster (eye)
ذبل dabl mother-of-pearl, nacre
ذبالة dubāla wick
ذابل dābil pl. ذبل dubul wilted, withered; dry, dried up; faded (color); languid, dull, lackluster, languishing (glance); feeble, weak, tired 307
ذحل daḥl pl. اذحال adḥāl, ذحول duḥūl resentment, rancor, hatred; revengefulness, vindictiveness; blood revenge
ذخر dakara a to keep, preserve, store away, put away (ھ s.th.); to save, lay by (ھ s.th.) VIII ادخر iddakara to keep, preserve, store away, put away (ھ s.th.); to store, accumulate, gather, hoard, amass (ھ s.th.);
to lay by (ھ s.th.); to save (ھ s.th., also strength, trouble, etc.) │ ل حبا ادخر (ḥubban) to harbor love for; جھدا يدخر ال (juhdan) he spares no effort
ذخر dukr pl. اذخار adkār s.th. stored away, put by, hoarded, or accumulated; stores, supplies; treasure
ذخيرة dakīra pl. ذخائر dakā’ir  treasure; stores, supplies; provisions, food; ammunition (mil.); (holy) relic
ادخار iddikār storage; hoarding, amassing, accumulation; storing, gathering; saving
مذخر mudakkir pl. -ūn assistant gunner, ammunition passer (mil., Syr.)
مذخر mudakkar pl. -āt supply
مدخرة muddakira pl. -āt (Syr.) storage battery, battery
ذرو see dura ذرة 
  ذرdarra u (darr) to strew, scatter, spread (ھ s.th.); to sprinkle (ھ ب on s.th. s.th.) │ ذر عينيه في الرماد(ar-ramāda fī ‘ainaihī) to throw dust in s.o.’s eyes; -- u (ذرور durūr) to rise, come up, rise resplendent over the horizon (sun) │ قرنه ذر (qarnuhū) it began to show, it emerged
ذر darr strewing, scattering, sprinkling; (coll.) tiny particles, atoms, specks, motes
ذرة darra (n. un.) pl. -āt atom; tiny particle; speck, mote │ ذرة مثقال mitqāl d. the weight of a dust particle, a tiny amount; a little bit; ذرة مقدار miqdār d. a tiny amount, a jot, an iota; الشك من ذرة (šakk) the least doubt
(qunbula) قنبلة ذرية │ atomic darrī ذري طاقة and (našāṭ) النشاط الذري bomb; atomic energy atomic (ṭāqa) ذرية
ذرور darūr powder
ذروري darūrī powdery, powdered, pulverized
ذريرة (darīra pl. ذرائر darā’ir  fragrant powder, cosmetic scented powder
ذري durrī of or pertaining to the offspring or progeny
ذرية durrīya pl. -āt, ذراري darārīy
progeny, descendants, children, offspring
  يذر yadaru see (وذر)
ذرب dariba a (darab) to be sharp, cutting
ذرب darab diarrhea (med.)
ذرب darib pl. ذرب durb sharp, cutting │ ذرب جرح (jurḥ) a malignant, incurable wound
ذراح durrāḥ pl. ذراريح darārīḥ  Spanish fly, blister beetle (zool.)
ذرع dara‘a a (dar‘) to measure (ھ s.th.); to take the measure or measurements (ھ of s.th.); to cover (ھ a distance); to cross, travel (ھ a country), travel through (ھ); to intercede, intervene, mediate, put in a word (ل for s.o., on behalf of s.o., عند with
s.o. else) V to use, employ, apply (بذريعة bi-darī‘a or بوسيلة bi-wasīla a means, an expedient); to use as a pretext, as an excuse (ب s.th.); to use as a means (ب s.th., الى to an end) VII to proceed, advance; to intervene
ذرع dar‘ power, ability, capability (ب to do s.th.) │ب ذرعا ضاق and ذرعا عنه ضاق (dar‘an) not to be up to s.th., be unable to do or accomplish s.th.; to be unable to stand or bear s.th., be fed up with, be tired of, feel uneasy about, be oppressed by 308 ذراع dirā‘ f. and m., pl. اذرع adru‘, ذرعان dur‘ān arm; forearm; connecting rod; cubit, in Syria = .68 m │in Egypt: ذراع بلدي (baladī) = .58 m, استانبولي ذراع (istanbūlī) = .665 m, ھندازة ذراع (hindāza)
. ca. = (mi‘mārī) ذراع ﻣﻌﻤﺎري m, .656 = . = (murabba‘) ذراع ﻣﻌﻤﺎري ﻣﺮﺑﻊ m, 75 = (ḥalabī) ذراع ﺣﻠﺒﻲ Iraq: in m; 5625 ذراع or (bagdādī) ذراع ﺑﻐﺪادي m, .68 ca. ذراع ﻣﻌﻤﺎري m, .80 ca. = (baladī) ﺑﻠﺪي above 800 see
ذرﻳﻊ darī‘ stepping lively, walking briskly; rapid, quick; torrential; rapidly spreading, sweeping (death); devastating; intercessor
ذرﻳﻌﺔ darī‘a pl. ذراﺋﻊ darā’i‘  medium, means, expedient; pretext, excuse
ذرف darafa i (darf, ذرﻳﻒ darīf, ذروف durūf, ذرﻓﺎن darafan) to flow, well forth (tears); to shed (ھ tears; said of the eye) II to exceed (على an age) X to let flow, shed (ھ tears)
ذرق daraqa i u (darq) to drop excrement (bird) IV do.
ذرق darq droppings, excrement (of a bird)
(ذرو and ذرا (ذرى darā u (darw) to disperse, scatter (ھ s.th.); to carry off, blow away ( ھ dust; said of the wind); to winnow, fan ( ھ grain); -- ذرى darā i (dary) do. II do. IV
= I; to throw down, throw off (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) │ الدمع العين اذرت (dam‘a) the eye shed tears V to be winnowed, be fanned; to climb (ھ on), scale (ھ s.th.); to seek shade or shelter (ب in, at, under); to take refuge (ب with), flee (ب to) X to take refuge (ب with), place o.s. under s.o.’s (ب) protection, flee (ب to s.o.)
ذرة dura durra, a variety of sorghum │ ﺷﺎﻣﻲ ذرة (eg.) Indian corn, maize (Zea mays L.); ﺻﻔﺮاء ذرة (ṣafrā’) do. (syr.); ﻋﻮﻳﺠﺔ ذرة (eg.) a variety of millet (Andropogon Sorghum Brot. var. Schwein furtianus Kcke.); ﺑﻴﻀﺎء ذرة (baiḍā’) millet (syr.)
ذرى daran protection, shelter
ذروة durwa, dirwa pl. ذرى duran summit; top; peak; culmination, climax, acme, apex
ﻣﺬرى midran and ﻣﺬارة midrāh pl.
ﻣﺬار madārin winnow, winnowing fork
ذﻋﺮ da‘ara a (da‘r) to frighten, scare, alarm, terrify (ه s.o.); pass. du‘ira to be frightened (ل by), get alarmed (ل at); -- da‘ira a (da‘ar) to be terrified, alarmed, dismayed IV to frighten, scare, alarm, terrify (ه s.o.) V and VII to be frightened, become alarmed
ذﻋﺮ du‘r fright, terror, alarm, panic
ذﻋﺮ da‘ar fright, alarm, dismay, consternation
ذﻋﺎف du‘āf lethal, deadly, immediately killing (poison) │ ذﻋﺎف ﻣﻮت (maut) a sudden, immediate death
ذﻋﻖ da‘aqa a (da‘q) to frighten (ه s.o.) by screaming
ذﻋﻦ da‘ana a (da‘an) and IV to submit, yield, give in (ل to s.o.), obey (ل s.o., an order, etc.); to concede voluntarily, grant willingly (ل ب to s.o. s.th.)
 اذﻋﺎن id‘ān submissiveness, pliability, compliance, obedience
ﻣﺬﻋﻦ mud‘in submissive, pliable, tractable, obedient
ﻣﺬﻋﺎن mid‘an pliable, tractable, docile, obedient, obliging, compliant
ذفر dafar pungent smell, stench
ذقن daqan, diqan pl. اذقان adqān, ذقون duqūn chin; -- daqn f., pl. ذقون duqūn beard, whiskers │ الشيخ ذقن d. aš-šaik; worm- wood, absinthe; ألذقانھم خروا karrū li- adqānihim they prostrated themselves; 309 الذقن حتى العمل في غرق (gariqa fī
l-‘amal) to be up to one’s neck in work, be swamped by work (properly: to drown in work); ذقنه على ضحك (ḍaḥika) pl. ذقونھم على (eg., syr.) to fool s.o., make fun of s.o., lead s.o. around by the nose (ب with s.th.); to put on an act for s.o.; ذقنه في ضحك to laugh in s.o.’s face
ذﻛﺮ dakara u (dikr, ﺗﺬﻛﺎر tadkār) to remember, bear in mind (ھ s.th.), think (ھ of); to keep in mind (ھ s.th.); to recall, recollect (ھ s.th.); -- (dikr) to speek, talk ( ھ of, about); to name, mention, cite, quote (ھ s.th.); to state, designate, indicate (ھ s.th.); to give (ھ e.g., foots, data); to point, refer (ھ to s.th.); to report, relate, tell (ھ ل s.th. to s.o.) │ ﻳﺬﻛﺮ ﺗﻘﺪم taqaddumun yudkaru notable progress; ﻳﺬﻛﺮ ﻻ (yudkaru) inconsiderable, not worth mentioning; ﺑﺎﻟﺨﻴﺮ) ﺑﺨﻴﺮ ذﻛﺮه) (kair) to have pleasant memories of s.o., hold s.o. in fond remembrance; to speak well of s.o.; ﺑﺸﺮ ذﻛﺮه (šarr) to have unpleasant memories of s.o.; to speak ill of s.o. II to remind (ه ب s.o. of s.th.), point out (ه ب to
s.o. s.th.), call s.o.’s (ه) attention (ب to); to make (ھ a word) masculine (gram.) III to parley, negotiate, confer, have a talk, take counsel (ه with s.o.); to memorize, commit to memory, learn, study (ھ one’s assignment, one’s lesson) │ دروﺳﻪ ذاﻛﺮ (durūsahū) to study one’s lessons, do one’s homework IV to remind (ه ھ s.o. of s.th.), call (ھ s.th.) to s.o.’s (ه) mind V to remember, bear in mind (ھ s.th.), think (ھ of s.th.) VI to remind each other (ھ of), revive each other’s memory of (ھ); to confer (together), have a talk, take counsel VIII ادﻛﺮ iddakara = V; X to remember,
recall, keep in mind, know by heart (ھ s.th.)
ذﻛﺮ dikr recollection, remembrance, reminiscence, memory, commemoration; reputation, repute, renown; naming, stating, mention(ing), quoting, citation; report, account, narration, narrative; invocation of God, mention of the Lord’s name; (in Sufism) incessant repetition of certain words or formulas in praise of God, often accompanied by music and dancing │ذﻛﺮ ﻋﻠﻰ (with foll. genit.) apropos of, speaking of ...; ذﻟﻚ ذﻛﺮ وﻋﻠﻰ speaking of that, incidentally, in that connection; اﻟﺤﻜﻴﻢ اﻟﺬﻛﺮ the Koran; اﻟﺬﻛﺮ ﺳﺎﻟﻒ abovementioned, afore- mentioned; اﻟﺬﻛﺮ ﺳﻌﻴﺪ of blessed memory, deceased, late; ﺑﺬﻛﺮه اﺷﺎد (ašāda) to celebrate, praise, commend s.o. or s.th., speak in glowing terms of s.o. or s.th.; ﻣﻦ ذﻛﺮ ﻋﻠﻰ زال ﻣﺎ (dikr min) he still remembered ..., he could still recall ...
ذﻛﻮرة dukūr, ذﻛﻮر pl. dakar ذﻛﺮ )ذﻛﻮر (pl. male; dukrān ذﻛﺮان dukūra, penis
ذﻛﺮة dukra reputation, repute, renown
ذﻛﺮى dikrā pl. ذﻛﺮﻳﺎت dikrayāt remembrance, recollection, memory; pl. reminiscences, memoirs
ذﻛﻴﺮ dakīr steel
ﺗﺬﻛﺎر tadkār, tidkār remembrance; reminder, memento; memory, commemoration; souvenir, keepsake; memorial day │اﻟﻘﺪﻳﺴﻴﻦ ﺟﻤﻴﻊ ﺗﺬﻛﺎر t. jamī‘ al-qiddīsīn All Saints’ Day (Chr.)
ﺗﺬﻛﺎري tadkārī, tidkārī serving to remind, helping the memory; memorial, commemorative
ﺗﺬﻛﺮة tadkira reminder; memento
ﺗﺬﻛﺮة tadkira, mostly pronounced tadkara, pl. ﺗﺬاﻛﺮ tadākir  message, note; slip, paper, permit, pus; card; ticket; admission ticket │ ﺑﺮﻳﺪ ﺗﺬﻛﺮة postcard; اﻟﺸﺨﺼﻴﺔ اﺛﺒﺎت ﺗﺬﻛﺮة t. itbāt aš-šakṣīya identity card; واﻳﺎب ذﻫﺎب ﺗﺬﻛﺮة t. dahāb wa-iyāb round-trip ticket; اﻟﺮﺻﻴﻒ ﺗﺬﻛﺮة (eg.) platform ticket; اﺷﺘﺮاك ﺗﺬﻛﺮة subscription ticket; ﻃﺒﻴﺔ ﺗﺬﻛﺮة (ṭibbīya) medical prescription; ﻣﺮور ﺗﺬﻛﺮة permit,
 ﺗﺬﻛﺮة passport; laissez-passer; pass, بطاقة (= card identity (Syr.) اﻟﻨﻔﻮس ٠١٣ al-intikāb t. ﺗﺬﻛﺮة اﻻﻧﺘﺨﺎب Eg.); شخصية ballot
ﺗﺬﻛﺮﺟﻲ tadkarjī, ﺗﺬﻛﺮي tadkarī ticket seller, ticket clerk; (streetcar) conductor
ﺗﺬﻛﻴﺮ tadkīr reminding (of s.o., ب of s.th:). reminder, memento; fecundation, pollination (of female blossoms; in pomiculture)
ﻣﺬاﻛﺮة mudākara pl. -āt negotiation, consultation. conference; deliberation (of a court; Syr.); learning, memorizing, memorization; study
ﺗﺬﻛﺮ tadakkur memory, remembrance, recollection
اﺳﺘﺬﻛﺎر istidkār memorizing, memorization, committing to memory
ذاﻛﺮة dākira memory
ﻣﺬﻛﻮر madkūr mentioned; said, above- mentioned; celebrated │ ﺷﻴﺌﺎ ﻳﻜﻦ ﻟﻢ ﻣﺬﻛﻮرا lam yakun šai’an m. it was of no importance, it was nothing
ﻣﺬﻛﺮ mudakkar masculine (gram.)
ﻣﺬﻛﺮة mudakkira pl. -āt reminder; note; remark.; notebook; memorandum, memorial, aide-mémoire, (diplomatic) note; ordinance, decree; treatise, paper, report (of a learned society, = Fr. mémoires); pl. reminiscences, memoirs │ اﻻﺗﻬﺎم ﻣﺬﻛﺮة m. al-ittihām bill of indictment (jur.); اﻟﺠﻠﺐ ﻣﺬﻛﺮة m. al-jalb writ of habeas corpus; ﺷﻔﺎﻫﻴﺔ ﻣﺬﻛﺮة (šifāhīya) verbal note (dipl.)
(ذﻛﻮ and ذﻛﺎ (ذﻛﻰ dakā u (dukūw, ذﻛﺎ dakan, ذﻛﺎء dakā’) to blaze, flare up (fire); to exude a strong odor; -- ذﻛﻲ dakiya (ذﻛﺎء dakā’) to be sharp-witted, intelligent II and IV to cause to blaze, fan (ھ the fire); to kindle (ھ s.th.) II to immolate an animal X = dakā
ذﻛﺎء dakā’ acumen, mental, acuteness, intelligence, brightness; -- dukā’  the sun
ذﻛﻲ dakīy pl. اذﻛﻴﺎء adkiyā’  intelligent, sharp-witted, clever, bright; redolent, fragrant; tasty, savory, delicious
ذل dalla i (dall, dull, ذاللة dalāla, ذلة dilla, مذلة madalla) to be low, lowly, humble, despised, contemptible II to lower, debase, degrade, humiliate, humble (ه ,ھ s.o., s.th.); to subject, break, subdue, conquer (ه s.o.); to overcome, surmount (ھ difficulties, obstacles) IV to lower, debase, degrade, humiliate, humble (ه ,ھ s.o., s.th.); to subject, break, subdue, conquer (ه ,ھ s.o. s.th.) V to lower o.s, humble o.s., cringe (الى or ل before s.o.); to be humble, obsequious X to think (ه s.o.) low or despicable; to think little (ه of), disesteem (ه s.o.); to deride, flout, disparage, run down (ه s.o.)
ذل dull lowness, lowliness, insignificance; ignominy, disgrace, shame, degradation, humiliation; humility, humbleness, meekness, submissiveness
ذلة dilla lowness, baseness, vileness, depravity; submissivness, obsequiousness
ذليل dalīl pl. اذالء adillā’ , اذلة adilla low, lowly; despised, despicable, contemptible; docile, tractable, pliable; humble, submissive, abject, servile; obsequious, cowering, cringing ذلول dalūl pl. ذلل dulul docile, tractable, gentie (animal); female riding camel
مذلة madalla humbleness, meekness, submissiveness; humiliation
تذليل tadlīl derogation, degradation, bemeaning; overcoming, conquering, surmounting (of difficulties, of an obstacle, and the like)
اذالل idlāl degradation, debasement, humiliation
تذلل tadallul self-abasement 311
ذلذل duldul pl. ذالذل dalādil  lowest, nethermost part of s.th.; train, hem (of a garment) │ الناس ذالذل the mob, the riffraff
اذلف adlaf , f. ذلفاء dalfā’, pl. ذلف dulf having a small and finely chiseled nose
ذلق dalq tip, point; tip of the tongue
الحروف ad-dulq, al-ḥurūf الحروف الذلق the (dulaqiya) الحروف الذوللقية and الذلقية (phon.) n l, r, liquids
ذلق dalq, daliq, ذليق dalīq eloquent, glib, facile (tongue)
 ذالقة dalāqa eloquence, glibness (of the tongue)
ذا see etc., ذلك
ذم damma u (damm, مذمة madamma) to blame, find blameworthy, dispraise, criticize (ه s.o.), find fault (ه with s.o.) II to rebuke, censure sharply (ه s.o.)
ذم damm censure, dispraise, derogation, disparagement
ذمة dimma pl ذمم dimam protection, care, custody; covenant of protection, compact; responsibility, answerableness; financial obligation, liability, debt; inviolability, security of life and property; safeguard, guarantee, security; conscience
│بالذمة؟ honestly? really? seriously? في ذمتي and ذمتي على upon my word, truly; ذمته في ,بذمته in s.o.’s debt, indebted to s.o.; بذمته ما his debt; ذمته على under s.o.’s protection; at s.o.’s disposal; for the benefit of s.o. or s.th., for s.o. or some purpose (allocation of funds); ذمته على ھي she is financially dependent on him, he has to support her; الذمة اھل ahl ad-d. the free non-Muslim subjects living in Muslim, countries who, in return for paying the capital tax, enjoyed protection and safety; الذمة طاھر of pure conscience,
upright, honest; ذمته برأ (barra’a) to relieve one’s conscience, meet one’s obligation
ذمي dimmī a zimmi, a free non-Muslim subject living in a Muslim country (see ذمة dimma: الذمة اھل)
ذمام dimām pl. اذمة adimma right, claim, title; protection, custody; security of life and property │ الليل ذمام في fī d. al-lail under cover of darkness
ذميم damīm censured; blameworthy, objectionable, reprehensible; ugly, unfair, nasty
ذميمة damīima pl. ذمائم damā’im  blame, censure
مذمة madamma pl. -āt blame, censure
مذموم madmūm censured; blameworthy, objectionable, reprehensible
ذمر V to grumble, complain (من or على about)
ذمار dimār sacred possession, cherished goods; honor
تذمر tadammur pl. -āt grumbling, complaint, grievance
ذمي damiya a (ذماء damā’) to be in the throes of death
ذماء damā’ last remnant; last breath of life │ الحياة من ذماء (ḥayāh) last breath of life
ذنب IV to do wrong, commit a sin, a crime, an offense; to be guilty, be culpable X to find or declare (ه s.o.) guilty of a sin, of a crime, of an offense
ذنب danb pl. ذنوب dunūb offense, sin, crime, misdeed
ذنب danab pl. ذنب adnāb tail; end; adherent (pol.), follower, henchman
ذنبي danabī caudal, tail- (in compounds); append aged, appendant, dependent
ذنيب dunaib petiole, leafstalk (bot.)
مذنب mudannab comet
مذنب mudnib culpable, guilty; sinner; evildoer, delinquent, criminal 312
ذھب dahaba a (ذھاب dahāb, مذھب madhab) to go (الى to); to betake o.s., travel (الى to); to go away, leave, depart; to disappear, vanish, decline, dwindle; to perish, die, be destroyed; with ب: to carry s.th. off, take s.th. away, abduct, steal s.th., sweep s.th. or s.o. away, annihilate, destroy s.th. or s.o.; الى به ذھب to lead or conduct s.o. to, take s.o. along to; to think, believe (الى s.th.), hold the view, be of the opinion (الى that); to escape (عن s.o.; fig.), slip (عن s.o.’s mind), ان عنه ذھب to lose sight of the fact that ..., forget that ... ; to ignore, skip, omit (عن s.th.); (with imperf.) to prepare to ..., be about to ... │ وجاء ذھب to go back and forth, walk up and down; ابعد الى ذھب من (ab‘ada) to go beyond ... (fig.); يذھب ما نزعته في (naz‘atihī) what follows along these lines; بك يذھب اين! (yudhabu) the idea of it! you can’t mean it! سدى ذھب (sudan) to be futile, be in vain, be of no avail; ذھب الرياح ادراج (adrāja r-riyāḥ) to go the ways of the winds, i.e., to pass unnoticed, without leaving a trace; to end in smoke, come to nothing, be futile, be in vain; ذھب الدابر كأمس (ka-amsi d-dābir) to vanish into thin air, disappear without leaving a trace
 (lit.: like yesterday gone by); ببھائه ذھب (bi- bahā’ihi) to take the glamor away from s.th.; بنفسه ذھب (bi-nafsihī) to kill s.o. (joy, terror, etc.); بخياله ذھب (bi-kayālihī) to let one’s imagination wander (الى to); ذھب مذھبه (madhabahū) to embrace s.o.’s madhab (see below); to follow s.o.’s teaching, make s.o.’s belief one’s own, embrace s.o.’s ideas; to adopt s.o.’s policy, proceed exactly like s.o.; كل ذھب مذھب (kulla madhabin) to do everything conceivable, leave no stone unturned, go to greatest lengths II to gild (ھ s.th.) IV to cause to go away, make disappear, remove, eliminate (ھ s.th.); to take away ( ھ s.th., عن from s.o.)
مذھب II tamadhaba (deriv. of مذھب madhab) to follow, adopt, embrace (ب a teaching, a religion, etc.)
ذھب dahab (m. and f.) gold; gold piece, gold coin │O ابيض ذھب (abyaḍ) platinum
ذھبي dahabī golden, of gold; precious, excellent, apposite (e.g., advice, saying, etc.) │ ذھبية آية golden word, maxim, epigram
ذھبية dahabīya pl. -āt dahabeah, a long light-draft houseboat, used on the Nile
ذھاب dahāb going; passing, passage, falling away, decrease, dwindling, loss, disappearance; leave, departure; trip, journey; outward-bound trip or journey (as opposed to اياب iyāb return trip; railroad); opinion, view (ان الى that) │ذھابا وايابا (iyāban) there and back; back and forth, up and down; واياب ذھاب تذكرة tadkarat d. wa-iyāb round-trip ticket
ذھوب duhūb going │ ومآب ذھوب coming and going; وذھوب جيئة في coming and going, in a state of fluctuation, having its ups and downs
مذھب madhab pl. مذاھب madāhib  going, leave, departure; way out, escape (عن from); manner followed, adopted procedure or policy, road entered upon; opinion, view, belief; ideology; teaching, doctrine; movement, orientation, trend (also pol.); school; mazhab, orthodox rite of fiqh (Isl. Law); religious creed, faith, denomination │O الحياة في مذھبه (ḥayāh) his philosophy of life, his weltanschauung;
المادي المذھب (māddī) the materialistic ideology, the materialistic approach to life; بعيدا مذھبا ذھب to go very far, be very extensive
مذھبي madhabī denominational, confessional; sectarian
مذھبية madhabīya sectarianism 313
ذاھب dāhib: اللون ذاھب d. al-laun faded, colorless, discolored
به مذھوب madhūb bihī and العقل مذھوب m. al-‘aql out of one’s mind, demented
مذھب mudahhab gilded
ذھل dahala a (dahl, ذھول duhūl) to forget, overlook, omit, neglect, fail to heed (عن s.th.); -- dahlia a (ذھول duhūl) to be perplexed, alarmed, dismayed, startled, surprised, baffled; to be astonished, be amazed; to frighten, scare, take alarm, flinch; to be absent-minded, be distracted; to be or become distracted (عن from), forget, overlook, fail to heed, neglect (عن s.th.) IV to baffle, startle, nonplus (ه s.o.); to distract (ه عن s.o. from), make (ه s.o.) forget (عن s.th.) VII = dahila
ذھول duhūl perplexity, consternation, bafflement, daze, stupor; confusion, bewilderment, dismay, alarm, fright; surprise; amazement, astonishment; absentmindedness, distraction, distractedness (عن from)
ذاھل diJAil negligent, forgetful, oblivious, distracted, absent-minded; dazed, in a stupor
مذھول madhūl perplexed, startled, alarmed, dismayed, dazed, confused, baffled, bewildered; distracted, absentminded
ذھل mudhil startling, baffling, amazing
منذھل mundahil alarmed, dismayed, perplexed, startled, baffled; distracted, absent-minded
ذھن dihn pl. اذھان adhān mind; intellect ذھني dihnī mental, intellectual ذھنية dihnīya mentality
ذو dū, genit. ذي dī, acc. ذا dā, f. ذات dāt, pl. m. ذوو dawū, اولو ulū, pl. f. ذوات dawāt (with foll. genit.) possessor, owner, holder or
 muter of, endowed or provided with, embodying or comprising s.th. │عقل ذو dū ‘aql endowed with brains, bright, intelligent; مال ذو rich, wealthy; صحة ذو dū ṣiḥḥa healthy; شأن ذو dū ša’n important, significant; القربى ذو dū l-qurbā relative, kin(sman); زرع ذي غير (zar‘) uncultivated (land); قبل ذي من min dī qablu than before; نفسه ذي من of one’s own accord, spontaneously; ذووه dawūhu his relatives, his kin, his folk; المعرفة ذوو dawū l- mawadda wa-l-ma‘rifa friends end acquaintances; الشبھات ذوو dawū š-šubuhāt dubious persons, people of ill repute; ذوو الشأن dawū š-ša’n important, influential people; the competent people (or authorities), those concerned with the matter; االمر اولوا ulū l-amr rulers, leaders; والعقد الحل اولو ulū l-hall wa-l-‘aqd influential people, those in power
ذات dāt pl. ذوات dawāt being, essence, nature; self; person, personality; the same, the selfsame; -self; الذوات people of rank, people of distinction, notables; ذاتا dātan personally │ البين ذات d. al-bain disagreement, dissension, disunion, discord, enmity; friendship; الجنب ذات d. al-janb pleurisy (med.); الرئة ذات d. ar-ri’a
pneumonia; الصدر ذات d. aṣ-ṣadr disease of the chest, pectoral ailment; اليد ذات d. al- yad wealth, affluence; ايدينا ذات d. aidīnā our possessions; اليمين ذات dāta l-yamīn to the right, الشمال ذات dāta š-šimāli to the left, اليسار ذات dāta l-yasāri do.; مرة ذات dāta marratin once, one time, مرة ذات في fī dāti marratin do.; يوم ذات dāta yaumin one day, يوم ذات في fī dāti yaumin do.; غد ذات في fī dāti gadin sometime in the future, before long; ذات في ... fī dāti ... (with foll. genit.) as to …, concerning ..., with reference to …, re; بالذات bi-d-dāt none other than ..., ... of all things, ... of all 314 people; personally, in person; بالذات انا I, of all people, ..., none other than I ...; لندن في بالذات in London, of all places; بالذات السعادة (sa‘āda) essential happiness, happiness proper; نفسه ذات dāt nafsihī, انفسھم ذات d. anfusihim his sejf, their selves, his (their) very nature; بذاته ھو ذاته، ھو (he) himself; الشيء ذات the same thing; األشياء ذات the same things; ذاتھا السنة (sana) the same year; لذاته by himself (itself); in itself; as such; for his (its) own sake; ذاته في in
itself; ذاته حد في fī ḥaddi d. do.; بذاته قائم self- existent, independent, self-contained, isolated; بالذات الثقة (tiqa) self-confidence; الذات حب ḥubb ad-d. and الذات محبة maḥabbat ad-d. self-love, selfishness, egoism; الذات على االعتماد self-confidence, self-reliance; بذاته صريح self-evident, self- explanatory; ذاته مناقض munāqiḍ dātahū self-contradictory; ذوات ابن ibn dawāt descended from a good family, highborn
ذاتي dātī own, proper; self-produced, self-created, spontaneous; personal; self- acting, automatic; subjective (philos.); (pl.
-ūn) subjectivist (philos.); ذاتيا dātīyan of o.s., by o.s.; personally, in person │ الحكم الذاتي (ḥukm) autonomy
ذاتية dātīya personality; subjectivism (philos.); identity (of a person) │تحقيق الذاتية identification (of a person)
ذاتية ال lā-dātīya impersonality
ذواتي dawātī high-class, exclusive, luxurious
ذأب see ذوابة 
 ذوب) ذاب)) dāba u (daub), (daub, ذوبان) to dissolve; to melt; to melt away; to liquefy, deliquesce; to dwindle away, vanish; to pine away, waste away (واسى حسرة ḥasratan wa-asan with grief and sorrow)
│حياء ذاب (hayā’an) to die of shame; ذابت في اظفاره (aẓfāruhū) to strive in vain for, make futile efforts in order to II to dissolve, melt, liquefy (ھ s.th.) IV to dissolve (also, e.g., tablets in water), liquefy (ھ s.th.); to melt (ھ s.th.); to smelt (ھ metal); to consume, spend, exhaust, use up, sap (ھ s.th.) │جھده اذاب (juhdahū) to exhaust s.o.’s energy; في مخه عصارة اذاب (‘uṣārata mukkihī) to rack one’s brain with
ذوب daub dissolution; solution (also, as a liquid)
ذوبان dawabān dissolution, melting, deliquescence, liquefaction │الثلج ذوبان الثلوج)) d. at-talj (at-tulūj) snowbreak, thaw; للذوبان قابل qābil li-d-d. meltable, soluble, dissoluble
تذويب tadwīb dissolution, solution, melting, liquefaction
اذابة idāba dissolution, solution, melting, liquefaction
 ذائب dā’ib dissolved; melted, molten; salable, dissoluble
ذو see ذوات and ذات
ذود) ذاد) dāda u (daud, ذياد diyād) to scatter, drive away, chase away; to remove (ھ، عن ه s.o., s.th. from); to defend, protect (عن s.o., s.th.) │عينه عن النوم ذاد (an-nauma ‘an ‘ainihī) to drive or keep the sleep from his eyes
ذود daud defense, protection (عن of s.th.)
ذياد diyād defense, protection (عن of s.th.)
مذود midwād pl. مذاود madāwid manger, crib, feeding trough
ذائد dā’id pl. ذادة dāda defender, protector
ذوق) ذاق) dāqa u (dauq, ذواق dawāq, مذاق madāq) to taste, sample (ھ food, etc.); to try, try out, teat (ھ s.th.); to get a taste 315 (ھ of s.th.), experience, undergo, suffer (ھ s.th.), go through s.th. (ھ) IV to have (ه s.o.) taste or sample (ھ s.th.), give (ه ھ s.o. s.th.) to taste V to taste (ھ s.th.) slowly, repeatedly, thoroughly; to get a taste (ھ of s.th.); to sense, perceive (ھ s.th.); to enjoy thoroughly, savor, relish (ھ s.th.); to derive pleasure (من from)
ذوق dauq pl. اذواق adwāq gustatory sense; taste (ل for; also, e.g., literary taste); perceptivity, responsiveness (في for); sensitivity, sensitiveness; savoir- vivre, suavity, urbanity, tact; liking, inclination; taste, flavor (of food, etc.) │ السليم الذوق good taste
ذوقي dauqī of taste, gustative, gustatory
ذواق dawāq taste
ذواق dawwāq epicure, connoisseur, gourmet, bon vivant
مذاق madāq taste
ذائقة dā’iqa sense of taste
ذوى dawā i and dawiya a to wither, wilt, fad.; to be withered, be dry IV to cause to wilt, to dry
ذاو dāwin withered, faded, drooping
ذو see ذي
ذيع) ذاع) dā’a i (ذيوع duyū‘) to spread, get about, circulate, be spread, be disseminated, be or become widespread; to leak out, become public, become generally known IV to spread. spread out, disseminate, propagate (ھ or ب s.th.); to make known, announce, make public, publicize, publish (ھ or ب s.th.); to promulgate (ھ or ب s.th.); to show, manifest, display (ھ or ب s.th.), give evidence (ھ or ب of); to reveal, disclose, divulge (ھ or ب s.th.); to emit (ھ electric waves); to broadcast, transmit (ھ s.th., على to the public; radio) │ بالتلفزة اذاع (talfaza) to telecast (ھ s.th.)
ذيوع duyū‘ widespreadness, commonness; spreading, spread, dispersion, diffusion; circulation (of news)
مذياع midyā‘ pl. مذاييع madāyī‘  telltale, talebearer, tattler, blabber,: indiscret person; radio station, broadcasting station; broadcasting; microphone; O radio set
اذاعة idā‘a spreading, dissemination, propagation; announcement, proclamation; publication; revelation, disclosure; playback (of a tape; as opposed to recording); broadcasting, radio; (pl. -āt) (radio) broadcast, transmission │ األخبار اذاعة i. al-akbāir newscast, news (radio); تلفزية اذاعة (talfazīya) television broadcast, telecast; السلكية اذاعة (lā-silkīya) and راديوفونية اذاعة radio broadcast; broadcasting, radio; اذاعة البوليس police radio; اإلذاعة مجلة majallat al-
i. radio magazine
ذائع dā’i‘ widespread, common, general; circulating, in circulation; widely known │الصيت ذائع d. aṣ-ṣīt famous, noted, renowned, widely known
مذيع mudī‘ spreader, disseminator, propagator, proclaimer; broadcasting, transmitting (used attributively); (radio) transmitter; radio announcer
مذيعة mudī‘a pl. -āt woman announcer (radio)
ذيل II to furnish (ھ s.th., esp. a book) with an appendix, add a supplement (ھ to); to provide (ھ s.th.) at the end (ب with) IV to trample underfoot, degrade, debase (ھ s.th.)
 ذيل dail pl. ذيول duyūl, اذيال adyāl the lowest or rearmost part of s.th., lower end; tail; hem, border (of a garment); train (of a skirt); lappet, coat tail; bottom, foot, end (of a page); appendage, appendicle; add.nda, supplement, appendix (of a book); retinue, 316 attendants, suite; dependent; result, consequence │ذيله في immediately thereafter: الذيل طاھر innocent, blameless, upright, honest; الذيل طھارة ṭahārat ad-d. innocence, moral integrity, probity, uprightness, honesty; الذيل طويل long, lengthy, extensive: باذياله تمسك tamassaka bi-adyālihī to cling to s.o.’s coat tails, hold on to s.o.; العفاء ذيل عليه جر (jarra, ‘alaihi) to wipe out s.th., bring about the doom of s.th., let s.th. sink into oblivion: الشيء بأذيال الذ to resort to s.th.

ر
راء rā’ name of the letter ر
lung ri’āt رئات ri’ūn, رئون pl. ri’a رئة
رئوي ri’awī pulmonary, pulmonic, pneumonic, of or pertaining to the lung, lung (used attributively)
رأب ra’aba a (ra’b) to mend, repair, patch up ( ھ a rent, and the like); to rectify, put in order, set right (ھ s.th.)
رؤبة ru’ba patch (for mending a rent)
مرأب mir’ab pl. مرائب marā’ib  repair shop, garage
رابور (Fr. rapport) report
راتينج ratinaj resin
رتينة = راتينة (look up alphabetically)
رؤد ru’d soft, tender; ru’d and رؤد فتاة (fatāh) delicate young girl
رئد ri’d pl. ارآد ar’ād person of approximately the same age, contemporary
radar rādār رادار radical radikālī راديكال radio rādiyō راديو
راديولوجي radiyōlōjī radiology
ذو راديوم فاعل │ radium radiyūm راديوم
radioactive
رأرأ ra’ra’a: بعينه رأرأ (bi-‘ainaihī) to roll one’s eyes
رأس ra’asa a (رئاسة ri’āsa) to be at the head, be the chairman, be in charge (ھ of s.th.); to preside (ھ over s.th.); to had, lead, direct, manage, run (ھ s.th.); -- رؤس ra’usa u to be the chief, the leader II to appoint as chief or head, make the director or leader, entrust with the direction, management or chairmanship (ه s.o.) V = ra’asa VIII to become or be the chief, head, leader, or director
رأس ra’s m. and f., pl. رؤوس ru’ūs, ارؤس ar’us head (also as a enumerative of cattle); chief, chieftain, head, leader; upper part, upper end; tip; top, summit, peak; vertex, apex; extremity, end; promontory, headland, cape (geogr.); main part; beginning: رأسا ra’san directly, straightway; immediately │برأسه sui generis, in a class by itself, independent, self-contained, e.g., برأسه علم (‘ilm) a science in itself; برأس رأس (both) alike, one like the other, equally, without distinction: رأس على (with foll. genit.) at the head of; at the end of; at the beginning of, before, prior to; والعين الرأس على (wa-l-‘ain) very gladly; juts as you wish! at your service! األشھاد رؤوس على ‘alā r. il-ašhād in public, for all the world to see; عقب على رأسا ra’san ‘alā ‘aqbin upside down, topsy- turvy, e.g., ٧١٣ عقب على رأسا قلبه (qalabahū) to turn s.th. completely upside down, upset s.th. from the bottom up;
من الرأس الى أخمص or (qadam) الرأس الى القدم toe; to head from l-qadam) (akmaṣi القدم رأس s.th.; to attention pay to رفع به رأسا evil; all of root the evil, principal the اآلفات Saudi E (cape. Tanura Ras رأس تنورة of clove tūm r. رأس ثوم center); oil Arabia, رأس bridgehead; al-jisr r. رأس الجسر garlic: firebrand; hotspur, hothead, (ḥāmiya) حامية رأس العمود Year; New as-sana r. رأس السنة
r. al-‘amūd capital (of a column or pilaster); الكتاب رأس letter-head; المال رأس pl. المال رؤوس capital (fin.): الرأس مسقط masqaṭ, masqiṭ ar-r. birthplace, home town; الرأس سمط samṭ ar-r. zenith (astron.); الرأس البلد (balad) the capital city; األصابع رؤوس tiptoes
رأسي ra’sī head (adj.), cephalic; main, chief, principal; perpendicular, vertical
 رأسمالي ra’s-mālī capitalistic; (pl. -ūn) capitalist
رأسمالية ra’s-mālīya capitalism
رئيس ra’īs pl. رؤساء ru’asā’ one at the head, or in charge, of; head; chieftain; leader; chief, boss; rais; director; head- master, principal, chairman; governor; president; manager, superintendent; conductor (mus.); superior (as distinguished from مرؤوس subordinate); (mil.) captain (Ir. 1922. Leb.; formerly also Syr. And Eg.); اول رئيس (awwal) military rank between captain and major (= Fr. capitaine 1  classe; Ir. 1922, Syr. 1952) │ األساقفة رئيس archbishop; البلدية رئيس
r. al-baladīya chief of a municipality, mayor; التحرير رئيس editor-in-chief; رئيس الحرب اركان r. arkān al-ḥarb chief of general staff; التشريفات رئيس r. at-tašrīfāt chief of protocol, master of ceremonies (of the king; formerly Ir.); الشماسمة رأس archdeacon; عرفاء رئيس r. ‘urafā’ (mil.) master sergeant (Ir., Syr.); األقسام رئيس r.
al-aqsām technical director general (of the State Railways; Eg.); النواب رئيس r. an- nuwwāb president of parliament, speaker of the (lower) house; الحرب اركان ھيئة رئيس
r. hai’at arkān al-ḥarb chief of general staff; الوزراء رئيس r. al-wuzarā’ and رئيس الوزارة prime minister, premier
رئيسة ra’īsa manageress; directress; mother superior
رئيسي ra’īsī main, chief, principal, leading │رئيسي دور (daur) leading role, leading part; رئيسي سبب (sabab) principal cause, main reason; رئيسي شارع main street; الرئيسية الفضائل cardinal virtues (Chr.); رئيسية مقالة (maqāla) editorial, leading article, leader
□ ريس rayyis (= رئيس) mate (naval rank; Eg.) │ممتاز رئيس (mumtāz) a naval rank (approx. = petty officer 3  class; Eg.
1939)
رئاسة ri’āsa, رياسة riyāsa (also رآسة) leadership, leading position; management, direction; chairmanship; presidency, presidentship; supervision, superintendency │ الوزارة رئاسة prime ministry, premiership; الرياسة دار presidential palace, seat of the chief executive of a country
ترؤس tara‘‘us direction, management; chairmanship
روائس rawā’is  cliffs lining river bode (wadis)
مرؤوس mar’ūs subordinate; (pl. -ūn) a subordinate, a subaltern
رأف ra’afa a and رؤف ra’ufa u (رأفة ra’fa, رآفة ra’āfa) to show mercy (ب on s.o.), have pity (ب with s.o.), be kind, gracious, merciful (ب to s.o.) V do.
رأفة ra’fa and رآفة ra’āfa morcy, compassion, pity: kindliness graciousness
رؤوف ra’ūf merciful, compassionate; kind, benevolent; gracious
ارأف ar’af kindlier, more gracious (ب toward) 318
رافيا rāfiyā raffia, raftia palm
 رأم ra’ama a (ra’m) to repair, mend (ھ s.th.)
 رئم ra’ima a (رئمان ri’mān) to love tenderly (ھ s.th.), be very fond (ھ of); to treat tenderly, fondle, cares (ھ s.th.)
رئم ri’m pl. ارآم ar’ām white antelope, addax
رءوم ra’ūm loving, tender (mother to her children)
ﷲ رام rāmallāh Ramallah (town in W Jordan, N of Jerusalem)
رامية rāmiya ramie, a strong, lustrous bast fiber; China jute (bot.)
راوند rāwand rhubarb
 رأى ra’ā يرى yarā (ra’y, رؤية ru’ya) to see; to behold, descry, perceive, notice, observe, discern (ھ s.th.); to look (ھ ھ at s.th. as), regard (ھ ھ s.th. as), consider, deem, think (ھ ھ s.th. to be ...); to judge; to be of the opinion (ان that), believe, think (ان that); to express one’s opinion; to feel (ان that); to deem appropriate, think proper (ھ s.th.), decide (ھ on s.th., انto do s.th.); to consider, contemplate │أرأيت a-ra’aita tell me! what do you think? العين رأي رأى (ra’ya l-ain) to see with one’s own eyes; رؤيا رأى (ru’yā) to have a dream; منه رأى العجب (‘ajaba) to be amazed at s.th.; رأى فائدة للشيء expect some benefit from s.th.; واجبه من رأى (min wājibihī) to regard as one’s duty, deem incumbent upon o.s.; رأى
 ان له to think that it would be in s.o.’s interest to ...; رأيه رأى (ra’yahū) to share s.o.’s. opinion; pass.: ان رؤي (ru’iya) it was decided that ...; الشيء رؤي it was felt proper to do III it was thought to be the right thing to do ill to act ostentatiously, make a show before people, attitudinize; to do eyeservice; to behave hypocritically, act the hypocrite, (dis)simulate, dissemble (ه toward s.o.) IV ارى arā to show, demonstrate (ه ھ to s.o. s.th.) ترى يا yā  turā (in interrogative sentences) what’s your opinion? would you say ...? │I wonder ..., ترى يا متى I wonder when ...,
ھل ترى wonder if ..., would you say
that ...? جاءت اتراھا (a-tarāhā) I wonder if she has come, would you say she has come? اعود اتراني would you say I should go back? V to deem, think, believe VI to present o.s. to or come into s.o.’s (ل) view, show o.s. (ل to s.o.); to appear, seem (ل to s.o.); to appear right, seem appropriate (ل to s.o.), be thought proper (ل by s.o.); to see one another; to look at o.s. (in a mirror); to act the hypocrite; to fake, feign, simulate (ب s.th.) VIII to consider, contemplate (ھ s.th.); to be of the opinion (ان that), decide (ان that) │رأيا ارتأى (ra’yan) to have an opinion; رأيه ارتأى (ra’yahū) to share s.o.’s opinion
رأي ra’y pl. آراء ārā’ opinion, view; idea, notion, concept, conception; advice, suggestion, proposal; (Isl. Law) subjective opinion, decision hued on one’s individual judgment (not on Koran and Sunna) │ في رأيي and رأيي عند in my opinion; ھذا من انا الرأي I am of this opinion; ان رأيه من he is of the opinion that ...; على الرأي أخذ (ukida) it was put to the vote, (the matter) was voted upon; رأيھم عند يكن لم he was not what they had expected; رأي فيه له يكن لم he had no say in the matter; العام الرأي (‘āmm) public opinion; الرأي ذو pl. اآلراء ذوو sensible, judicious; man of good sense and judgment; well-informed, knowledgeable person, one in the know; اآلراء تبادل    tabādul al-ārā’, exchange of views; صلب الرأي ṣulba ar-r. obstinate, stubborn,
opinionated; الرأي قسم qism ar-r. committee of experts, council on legal and economio matters (attached to the ministries; Eg.)
راية rāya pl. -āt banner, flag 319
رؤية ru’ya seeing, looking, viewing; inspection, examination
رؤيا ru’ya pl. رؤى ru’an vision; dream
│ الرؤيا سفر sifr ar-r. the ھpocalypse (Chr.)
مرأى mar’an sight, view; vision; apparition │ من مرأى على before s.o.’s eyes; من ومسمع مرأى على (wa-masma‘in) before the eyes and ears of; with full knowledge of
مرآة mir’āh pl. مراء marā’in, مرايا marāyā looking glass, mirror; reflection, reflected image
□ مراية mirāya pl. -āt looking glass mirror
رئاء ri’ā and رياء riyā’ eyeservice; hypocrisy, dissimulation; dissemblance; simulation (ب of s.th.)
مراءاة ,مراآة murā’āh eyeservice; hypocrisy, dissimulation, dissemblance; simulation (ب of s.th.)
راء rā’in viewer, onlooker, spectator, observer
O رائية rā’iya pl. -āt view finder (of a camera)
مرئي mar’īy seen; visible; المرئيات the visible things, the visible world
murā’ūun مراؤون pl. murā’in مراء
hypocrite
رء see رئوي and رئة 
  راي rāy an Egyptian variety of salmon
رأى   see راية  
رب rabba u (rabb, ربابة ribāba) to be master, be lord, have possession (ه ھ، of), control (ھ ھ، s.o., s.th.), have command or authority (ه ھ، over); -- u (rabb) and II to raise, bring up (ه a child) II to deify, idolize (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.)
رب rabb pl. ارباب arbāb lord; master; owner, proprietor (Isl. Law); (with foil. genit.) one possessed of, endowed with, having to do with, etc.; الرب the Lord (= God) │بحري رب (baḥrī) a naval rank (approx. = seaman; Eg.); العائلة رب father of the family, paterfamilias; السلطان ارباب
the ارباب المال rulers; the as-sulṭān a. scensionھ the صعود الرب capitalists; al-ma’āšāt a. ارباب المعاشات (Chr.);
 previously those ارباب السوابق pensioners; artists ارباب الفنون convicted;
ربة rabba pl. -āt mistress; lady │ربة المنزل r. al-manzil the lady of the house; البيت ربة r. al-bait landlady; شعره ربة r. ši‘rihī his muse; الحجال ربات r. al-ḥijāl the ladies
رب rubb pl. رباب ribāb, ربوب rubūb rob, thickened juice (of fruit): mash, pulp
رب rubba (with fol. indet. genit.) many a, e.g., رجل رب (rajulin) many a man, رب مرة (marratin) many a time
ربما rubbamā sometimes; perhaps, maybe, possibly
ربة rabba, ribba a kind of skin eruption affecting the head and face
رباب rabāib, ربابة rabāba rebab or rebec, a stringed instrument of the ھrabs resembling the fiddle, with one to three strings (in Eg. usually two-stringed)
ربيب rabīb pl. -āt ارباء aribbā’ foster son, stepson; foster father; confederate, ally
ربيبة rabība pl. ربائب rabā’ib  foster daughter, stepdaughter; foster mother; (woman) ally
ربوبية rubūbīya divinity, deity, godship
ربان rubbān pl. -īya, ربابنة rabābina captain, skipper; a naval rank, approx. = captain, ثان ربان (tānin) approx. = commander (Eg. 1939)
رباني rabbānī divine; pertaining to God
الصالة الربانية things; divine الربانيات │
(ṣalāh) the Lord’s Prayer (Chr.)
مربة (eg.) mirabba (= مربى murabban) jam, preserved fruit 320
راب rābb stepfather
رابة rābba stepmother
ربأ raba’a a to hold in esteem, esteem highly ( ب s.o.); If '! 4J to consider s.o. above s.th., above doing s.th., have too high an oplnion of s.o. as to suspect him of (doing) s.th. or as to expect him to do s.th.; عن بنفسه ربأ (bi.-nafsii) to deem o.s. above s.th., be too proud for, stand aloof from
guard rabāya ربايا pl. rabī’a ربيئة
ربت rabata i (rabt) to pat, caress, stroke (ه s.o.) II do. │خده على ربت (kaddihi) to pat s.o.’s cheek; كتفه على ربت (katifihi) to pat s.o. on the shoulder; نفسه ربت to be self-satisfied, self-complacent, smug
ربح rabiḥa a (ribḥ, rabaḥ) to gain (من ھ from s.th. s.th.), profit (من from); to win (sports, games) │تجارتھم ربحت ما (tijāratuhum) their business was unprofitable II and IV to make (ه s.o.) gain, allow s.o. (ه) a profit
ربح ribḥ pl. ارباح arbāḥ gain, profit; benefit; interest (on money); pl. proceeds, returns, revenues; O dividends │بسيط ربح simple interest, مركب ربح (murakkab) compound interest
رباح rabbāḥ pl. ربابيح rabābīḥ  monkey
اربح arbaḥ  more profitable, more lucrative
مرابحة murābaḥ (Isl. Law) resale with specification of gain, resale with an advance
رابح rābiḥ profiteer, gainer, winner; beneficiary; lucrative, gainful, profitable (business)
مربح murbiḥ lucrative, gainful, profitable
ربد V to become clouded, become overcast (sky); to turn ashen, take on a glowering expression (face, with anger) IX to become ashen, assume a glowering expression (face)
مربد murbadd clouded; gloomy, morose (face)
ربص rabaṣa u (rabṣ) to wait, look, watch, be on the lookout (ب for) V to lurk, lie in wait (ل for s.o.), waylay, ambush (ل s.o.); to lay an ambush, move into an ambush; to take up positions (mil.); to expect (ب ھ، s.th.), wait (ب ھ، for s.th.) │الفرصة تربص (furṣata) to wait (or look) for an opportunity; األمر تربص (amra) to wait for s.th. to befall s.o. or to happen to s.o., e.g.,
; الدوائر به تربص to wait; for s.o. to meet with disaster
تربص tarabbuṣ probationary term (adm.)
متربص mutarabbiṣ candidate, aspirant
 ربض rabaḍa (rabḍ, rubūd) to lie down; to lie, rest (animals; with the chest to the ground); to lurk (ل for s.o.)
ربض rabaḍ pl. ارباض arbāḍ outskirts, suburb; place where animals lie down to rest
مربض marbaḍ pl. مرابض marābiḍ  place where animals lie down to rest; sheep pen, fold
ربط rabaṭa u i (rabṭ) to bind, tie up, make fast, moor (ھ s.th.); to tie, fasten, attach, hitch ( ھ الى s.th. to); to connect (ھ الى s.th. with); to fix, appoint, determine (ھ s.th.); to value, rate, assess (ھ s.th.); to add, append, affix (ھ الى s.th. to); to insert (الى ھ s.th. in); to combine, unite (ھ s.th., – بين وبين s.th. with); to ligate (ھ s.th.), apply a tourniquet (ھ to); to bandage, dress (ھ a wound); to bridle, check (على ھ، s.th.); to brake (ھ a train); to suspend (ه a cleric; Chr.) │لسانه ربط (lisānahū) to silence s.o.; قلبه على ربط (qalbihī) to fortify s.o., give
s.o. patience (said of God); جأشه ربط (ja’šahū) to keep one’s self-control, remain calm, be undismayed; 321 ربط الطريقة to practice highway robbery III to be lined up, posted, stationed (troops); to line up, take up positions; to be moored (ship); to move into fighting positions │ قضيته في رابط (qaḍīyatihī) to defend the cause of, fight for VIII to bind o.s., commit o.s. engage o.s.; to be bound (ب by, also, e.g., by an obligation), be tied (ب to); to be linked, be connected (ب with); to depend (ب on); to unite, join forces
ربط rabṯ binding, tying; fastening, joining, attaching, connecting; fixation, determination (of an amount, of a number); valuation, assessment │ مالي ربط financial allocation; والربط الحل اھل ahl al- ḥall wa-r. infIuentiBJ people, those in power; الربط مكان makān ar-r. (welded) seam, weld (techn.)
ربط rabaṭ (tun.) section, quarter (of a city), suburb
ربط rabṭa pl. -āt, رباط ribāṭ ribbon, band, bandage; bundle; parcel, package │ الرقبة ربطة r. ar-raqaba necktie; الساق ربط r. as-sāq garter; النقود ربطة money purse
رباط ribāṭ pl. -āt, ربط rubuṭ, اربطة ar- biṭa ribbon, band; ligature, ligament; bandage; dressing (of a wound); bond, fetter, shackle; -- suspension (of a cleric; Chr.); (pl. -āt, ربط rubuṭ) inn for travelers, caravansary; hospice (for Sufis or the poor) │االجربة رباط r. al-ajriba garter; رباط الجزمة r. al-jazma shoestring; الرقبة رباط r. ar-raqaba necktie
رباط ribāṭ, الفتح رباط ribāṭ al-fatḥ Rabat (capital of Morocco)
الجأش رباط ribāṭ al-ja’š composure, self- control, calmness, intrepidity
مربط marbiṭ, marbaṭ pl. مرابط marābiṭ 
place where aniimals are tied up
مربط mirbaṭ pl. مرابط marābiṭ  hawser, mooring cable; rope; O terminal (el.)
ارتباط irtibāṭ connectedness, connection, link; contact, 1iaison; tie (ب to); obligation, engagement, commitment; bearing (ب on), connection ((ب with), relation (ب to); unity; league, confederation │ ارتباط بدونbidūn irt, not binding, without obligation (com.); ضابط ارتباط liaison officer
الجأش رابط rābiṭ al-ja’š composed, calm, unruffled, undismayed, fearless
رابطة rābiṭa pl. روابط rawābiṭ  band; bond, tie; connection, link; confederation, union, league │ الصداقة روابط r. aṣ-ṣadāqa bonds of friendship; االسالمية الرابطة (Islāmīya) the Moslem League
مربوط marbūṭ bound; connected; fastened, tied, moored (الى to); fixed, appointed; fixed salary; estimate (of the budget)
مرابط murābiṭ posted, stationed; garrisoned (troops); Marabout │ الجيش المربوط (jaiš) the Territorial Army (Eg.)
مرتبط murtabiṭ connected, linked (ب with); bound, committed (ب by); depending, conditional (ب on)
ربع raba‘a a to gallop (horse); -- to sit; to squat; to stay, live II to quadruple, multiply by four, increase fourfold (ھ s.th.); to square (ھ a number) V to sit or sit down cross-legged; to sit │ على تربع العرش(‘arš) to mount the throne, sit on the throne
 ربع rab‘ pl. ربوع rubū‘, رباع ribā‘, ارباع arbā‘, اربع arba‘ home, residence, quarters; pl. ربوع region, area territory, lands; ربع (group of) people │ الربع الخاليRub‘ al Khali (desert region in S Arabia)
ربع rib‘: الربع حمى ḥummā r-rib‘ quartan (fever)
ربع rub‘ pl. ارباعarbā‘ quarter, fourth part; roubouh, a dry measure 322 (Eg. = ٨.٥٢ = قدح l); (syr.) 25-piaster piece │ربع سنوي r. sanawī quarterly, trimestral
ربعي rub‘ī quarterly, trimestral
ربعة rab‘a: القوام ربعة r. al-qiwām and القامة ربعة r. al-qāma (m. and f.) or medium height, medium sized
ربعة rub‘a robhah, a dry measure (Eg.;
l) قدح = ٦١٥.٠ =
رباع rabbā‘ athlete (boxer, wrestler, weight lifter, etc.)
ربيع rabī‘ spring, springtime, vernal season; name of the third and fourth months of the Muslim year (األول ربيع r. al-awwali Rabia I, and الثاني ربيع r. at-tānī Rabia Il); quarter, fourth part
اربعة arba‘a (f. اربع arba‘) four │ األربع ذوات dawāt al-arba‘ the quadrupeds
اربع عشرة (f. ‘ašara arba‘ata اربعة عشر
arba‘a ‘ašarata) fourteen
اربعون arba‘ūn forty; األربعون a ceremony held on the 40  day after s.o.’s death │األربعين عيد ‘īd al-a. Ascension Day (Chr.)
رباعي rubā‘ī consisting or four, quadripartite, fourfold, quadruple; quadrangular; tetragonal; (gram.) consisting of four radical letters, quadriliteral; quartet; (pl. -āt) quatrain (poet.) │رباعي مؤتمر (mu’tamar) four- power conference; األضالع رباعي quadrilateral; األرجل رباعي r. l-arjul quadruped(al), four-footed; رباعي محرك المشوار muḥarrik r. l-mišwār four-cycle engine
يوم األربعاء al-arbi‘ā’, al-arba‘ā’, األربعاء
yaum al-a. Wednesday
يربوع yarbū‘ pl. يرابيع yarābī‘ jerboa (Jaculus jaculus; zool.)
مربع marba‘ pl. مرابع marābi‘ meadow
تربيع tarbī‘ lunar quarter; -- (pl. ترابيع tarābī‘ ) quadrangle; square, plaza (surrounded by houses) │الدائرة تربيع quadrature or the circle
تربيعة tarbī‘a pl. ترابيع tarābī‘  square, quadrangle; square, plaza; square panel; tile, floor tile
تربيعي tarbī‘ī quadratic, square
الرابع ar-rābi‘ the fourth; رابعا fourthly, in the fourth place
رابع rābi‘ (due to erroneous pointing) =
q.v. رائع
مربوع marbū‘ of medium height, medium-sized
مربع murabba‘ fourfold, quadruple; quadragular; tetragonal; square, quadratic; quadrangle; square; (pl. -āt) quadrangular piece; quartet │مربع متر (mitr) square meter; األضالع مربع quadrilateral (math.)
مربعة murabba‘a pl. -āt section, district, area
مرابع murābi‘ partner in an agricultural enterprise (sharing one quarter of the gains or losses)
متربعا جلس jalasa mutarabbi‘an to sit crosslegs
رابغ rābig pleasant, comfortable
ربق ribq lasso, lariat
رباق ribaq, ربق pl. rabqa ribqa, ربقة
ribāq, ارباق arbāq noose
ربك rabaka u (rabk) to muddle, entangle, complicate (ھ s.th.); to confuse, throw into confusion (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); -- rabika a (rabak) to be in an involved, confused situation VIII to be confused; to become involved (في in)
ربك rabak involved, confused situation
ربك rabik: confused; in trouble, beset by difficulties
ارتباك irtibāk pl. -āt entanglement, involvement; snarl, tangle, muddle, mess;
 confusion; embarrassment; upset (of the stomach) 323
مربك murabbik confusing, bewildering, disconcerting
مرتبك murtabik; confused, complicated, involved; bewildered, disconcerted, embarrassed; involved (في in)
ربل rabil plump, fleshy, fat (person)
ربلي rablī, rabalī fleshy
ربلة rabla pl. rabalāt (mass of) flesh (of the body)
ربيل rabīl fleshy, corpulent, fat
ربالة rabāla corpulence
رب see ربما
ربو) ربا) rabā u (رباء rabā’, ربو rubūw) to increase; to grow; to grow up; to exceed, ( على a number, also عن), be more than ((على المئة على يربو ما│ more than a hundred II to make or let grow; to raise, rear, bring up (ه s.o.); to educate; to teach, instruct (ه a child); to breed, raise (ھ e.g., poultry, cattle); to develop (ھ e.g., a method) III to practice usury IV to make grow, augment, increase (ھ s.th.); to exceed (على a number, an age, a measure) V to be brought up, be educated; to be bred, be raised
ربو rabw dyspnea, asthma
ربوة rubwa (rabwa, ribwa) pl. ربى
ruban hill
ربوة ribwa pl. -āt ten thousand, myriad
ربا riban interest; usurious interest; usury
ربوى ribawī usurious
رباء rabā’ surplus, excess; superiority (
على over s.o.); favor
تربية tarbiya education, upbringing; teaching, instruction; pedagogy; breeding, raising (of animals) │التربية سيئ sayyi’ at-t. ill-bred; التربية قليل ill-bred, uncivil, ill- mannered; التربية علم ‘ilm at-t. pedagogy, pedagogics; األطفال تربية baby care; التربية البدنية (badanīya) physical education, physical training; الحيوان تربية t. al- ḥayawān cattle farming, stockbreeding; الدجاج تربية t. ad-dajāj chicken farming,
poultry husbandry; السمك تربية t. as-samak pisciculture; النباتات تربية t. an-nabātāt plant cultivation
tarbiyawī تربيوي tarbawī, تربوي
pedagogic, pedagogical
رابية rābiya pl. رواب rawābin hill
مرب murabbin pl. مربون murabbūn educator; pedagogue; breeder (of livestock)
مربية murabbiya pl. -āt tutoress, governess; dry nurse, nursemaid
مربى murabban raised, brought up; educated; well-bred, well-mannered; jam, preserved fruit; pl. مربيات murabbayāt preserves
مراب murābin usurer
مترب mutarabbin well-bred, well- mannered
ربورتاج (Fr. reportage) pl. -āt reportage, report
ارت aratt , f. رتاء rattā’ , pl. رت rutt afflicted with a speech defect
رتب II to array, arrange, dispose (ھ s.th. in a regular sequence or order); to decorate, dress (iii a show window); to settle, determine, regulate (ھ s.th.); to put into proper order, put together (ھ words); to prepare, set aside, earmark (ھ s.th.); to fix, appoint (ھ ل a salary for s.o.); to make (ھ s.th.) result or accrue (على from), derive ( ھ على s.th. from), make (ھ s.th.) the result or consequence of (على) V to fall in line; to be arranged, organized or set up (along the lines of); to be set aside, be assigned; to be subordinate (على to s.th.), be the result or consequence (على of), result, follow, derive, spring (على from), be caused (على by) │بذمته ترتب (bi-dimmatihī) to become the debtor of s.o. 324
رتبة rutba pl. رتب rutab degree, grade, level; rank, standing, station; class, quality; (mil.) rank; clerical rank, order (of the Christian ministry); religious ceremony (Chr.) │الرتب كتاب ritual (of the Roman Catholic Church)
رتابة ratāba monotony
رتيب ratīb monotonous
 رتباء rutabā’  noncommissioned officers (Syr.; mil.)
مرتبة martaba pl. مراتب marātib  step; a steplike elevation serving as a seat; mattress; grade, degree, rank, class │في األولى المرتبة (ūlā) first (mortgage)
ترتيب tartīb pl. -āt order, arrangement, array; sequence, succession; make-up, setup; layout (of a complex, e.g., of houses); organization; preparation, arrangement, provision, measure, step; rite of administering a sacrament (Chr.) │ بالرترتيب one by one, in proper succession;
<< غيرترت من disorderly, in confusion
ترتيبي tartībī ordinal │ترتيبي عدد (‘adad) ordinal number .
راتب rātib monotonous; (pl. رواتب rawātib  salary, pay, emolument; pl. رواتب certain supererogatory exercises of devotion
مرتب murattab arranged; organized, set up, regulated, etc.; (pl. -āt) salary, pay, emolument
رتج rataja u (ratj) to look, bar, bolt (ھ the door); -- ratija a (rataj) to be tonguetied, be speechless, falter IV pass. عليه ارتج (urtija) words failed him, he was speechless, he didn't know what to say, he was at a loss
رتاج ritāj pl. رتج rutuj, رتائج ratā’ij  gate, gateway I eli)1 p muḥkam ar-r. firmly bolted (gate)
رتع rata‘a a (rat‘,رتوع rutū‘, رتاع ritā‘) to pasture, graze; to gormandize, carouse, feast; to revel, indulge freely (في in) IV to pasture, put out to graze (ھ cattle)
مرتع marta‘ pl. مراتع marāti‘  rich grazing land, pasture; fertile ground (ل for; fig.); breeding ground, hotbed (of vice, of evil, etc.)
رتق rataqa u i (ratq) to mend, repair, patch up, sew up (ھ s.th.)
رتق ratq pl. رتوق rutūq patching, mending, repair; dam (of a stocking)
رتك rataka u i, (ratk, ratak, رتكان ratakān) to run with abort steps, trot
مرتك martak litharge (chem.)
رتل ratila a (ratal) to be regular, well-ordered, neat, tidy II to phrase elegantly (الكالم al- kalāma one’s words); to psalmodize, recite in a singsong; to sing, chant (ھ spiritual songs, hymns; Chr.)
رتل ratl pl. ارتال artāl railroad train │ آلي رتل (ālī) motorized convoy (mil.)
رتيالء rutailā’  harvestman (Phalangium), daddy longlegs; tarantula
ترتيل tartīl slow recitation of the Koran (a technical term of tajwīd); psalmodizing, psalmody, singsong recitation; singing, chanting (of hymns, etc.; Chr.); -- (pl. تراتيل tarātīl ) hymn; religious song (Chr.)
hymn tarātīl  تراتيل pl. tartīla ترتيلة
مرتل murattal church singer; choirboy, chorister (Chr.); singer, chanter
رتم ratama i (ratm) to utter, say (بكلمة bi- kalima a word; only with neg.)
رتم ratam (coll.; n. un. ة) retem (Retama raetam Webb., Genista raetam Forsk.; bot.)
رتمة ratma and رتيمة ratīma pl. رتائم ratā’im , رتام ritām thread wound around one’s finger as a reminder 325
رتو) رتا) ratā u and II رتى rattā to mend, darn (
ھ e.g., stockings)
رتوش (Fr. retouche) ritūš retouch
resin )راتينج (= ratīnaj رتينج
رتينة (It. retina) ratīna pl. رتائن ratā’in 
incandescent mantle
رث ratta i (رثاثة ratāta, رثوثة rutūta) to be ragged, tattered, shabby. worn (garment)
رث ratt pl. رثاث ritāt old, shabby, worn, threadbare │الھيئة رث r. al-hai’a of shabby appearance
رثة ritta old, outmoded things, worn clothes
رثيث ratīt old, .habby, worn, threadbare رثاثة ratāta shabbiness, raggedness رثوثة rutūta shabbiness, raggedness
رثو) and رثا (رثي ratā u (ratw) to bewail, lament, celebrate in an elegy, in a funeral oration (ه a deceased person); -- رثى ratā i
 (raty, رثاء ritā’, مرثية martiya, مرثاة martāh) to bewail, lament, bemoan (ه a deceased person); to elegize, celebrate in an elegy, in a funeral oration (ه a deceased person); to mourn (ل for, over), deplore (ل s.o. or s.th.); to pity (ل s.o.), feel sorry (ل for) │ بمرثاة رثاه to elegize s.o. (a deceased person), bewail and celebrate him in an elegy; له يرثى شيء (yurtā) a deplorable, regrettable thing
رثى raty bewailing, bemoaning, lamentation
رثاء ritā’ bewailing, bemoaning, lamentation; regret; elegiac poetry
رثية ratya pl. ratayāt arthritis, gout
مرثية martiya and مرثاء martā’ pl. مراث marātin elegy, dirge, epicedium; pl. مراث funeral orations
رج raja u (rajj) to convulse, shake, rock (ھ s.th.); pass. rujja to be shaken, tremble, shake, quake VIII to be convulsed, shake, tremble, quake
رج rajj shaking, rocking, convulsion
رجة rajja convulsion; shook, concussion
رجاج rajjāj trembling, quaking, shaking, rocking
ارتجاج irtijāj shock, concussion; trembling, tremor │ O المخ ارتجاج irt. al- mukk cerebral concussion (med.)
رجأ IV to postpone, adjourn, defer, put off (ھ s.th.)
ارجاء irjā’ postponement, deferment, adjournment
رجب rajaba u and rajiba a (rajab) to be afraid (من or عن of), be awed (من or عن by)
رجب rajab Rajab, the seventh month of the Muslim year
رجح rajaḥa a i u (رجوح rujūḥ, رجحان rujḥān) to incline (scale of a balance); to weigh more, be of greater weight; to preponderate, predominate; to surpass, excel (ه s.o.); to be very likely (ان that),
ان عنده رجح it appeared to him most likely that ...; -- to weigh (بيده ھ s.th. in the hand) II to make (ھ s.th.) outweigh (على s.th. else), give preponderance (ھ to s.th., على
over); to think (ھ s.th.) weightier; to prefer (ھ على s.th. to), give (ھ s.th.) preference (على to), favor (ھ على s.th. more than); to think likely or probable (ھ s.th., ان that) V to carry greater weight, be weightier, preponderate; to swing back and forth, pendulate; to rock; to seesaw, tester VIII to swing back and forth, pendulate; to rook; to seesaw, tester
رجاحة rajāḥa forbearance, indulgence, leniency; composure, equanimity
رجحان rujḥān preponderance, predominance (على over), ascendancy, superiority 326
ارجح arjaḥ  superior in weight, preponderant; having more in its favor, more acceptable; preferable; more likely, more probable │ ان األرجح it is most likely that ...; probably ...; األرجح على probably, in all probability
ارجحية arjaḥīya preponderance, predominance, prevalence
ارجوحة urjūḥa pl. اراجيح arājīḥ  seesaw; swing; cradle
راجح rājiḥ) superior in weight, preponderant; having more in its favor, more acceptable; preferable; probable, likely
marājīḥ  مراجيح pl. marjūḥa مرجوحة
seesaw; swing
مرجح murajjaḥ preponderant, predominant; probable, likely
رجرج rajraja and II tarajraja to tremble, quiver; to sway
رجراج rajrāj agitated; trembling, tremulous; swaying; quivering; الرجراج the sea
  رجزVIII to compose or declaim poems in the meter rajaz; to thunder, roar, surge (sea)
رجز rujz, rijz punishment (inflicted by God); dirt, filth
رجز rajaz name of a poetical meter
ارجاز arjāz verses in the meter rajaz;
little (work) song
ارجوزة urjūza pl. اراجيز arājīz  poem in the meter rajaz
  ارجوز look up alphabetically
رجس rajisa a (rajs) and rajusa u (رجاسة rajāsa) to be dirty, filthy; to commit a shameful act, do s.th. disgraceful or dirty
رجس rijs pl. ارجاس arjās dirt, filth; dirty thing or act, atrocity
رجس rajas pl. ارجاس arjās dirt, filth
رجس rajis dirty, filthy
رجاسة rajāsa dirt, squalor
رجاس rajjās roaring, surging (sea); thundering
رجع raja‘a i (رجوع rujū‘) to come back, come again, return; to recur; to resort, turn (الى to); to recommence, begin again, resume ( الى s.th.); to fall back (الى on), go back, revert (الى to); to look up (الى s.th. in a book), consult (الى a book); to go back, be traceable (الى to), be attributable (ان الى to the fact that ...), derive, stem, spring (الى from); الى به رجع to reduce s.th. to (its elements, or the like); to depend (الى on); to be due, belong by right (الى to); to fall under s.o.’s (ل) jurisdiction, be s.o.’s (ل) bailiwick; to desist, refrain (عن from); to withdraw (عن, also في e.g., what one has said), revoke, countermand, repeal, cancel (عن or على e.g., a decision); to turn against
s.o. (فالن على به رجع ؛(على to claim restitution of s.th. from s.o.; to demand, claim (ب s.th., على from s.o.); to entail, involve (ب s.th., a consequence); to have a good effect (في on), be successful (في with) │عقبه على رجع (‘aqbihī) pl. على رجعوا اعقابھم (a‘qābihim) to retrace one's steps, go back the way one came; الصحة الى رجع (ṣiḥḥa) to regain one’s health; الى رجع صوابه (ṣawābihī) to come to one's senses; نفسه الى رجع to watch o.s., examine o.s.;
ان الى ذلك يرجع this is due to the fact that ...; الى السبب يرجع (sabab) the reason is to be found in ...; الى الذاكرة به رجعت he recalled, remembered ...; كالمه في رجع (kalāmihī) to go back on one’s word II to cause to come back or return; to return, give back; to send back; to turn away (ه عن s.o. from); to sing or chant in a vibrant, quavering tone; to echo, reverberate (ھ s.th.) │رجع صداه (ṣadāhū) to return the echo of s.th., echo s.th. III to return, come back (ه ھ، to); to revert 327
رجعع rujū‘ return; reverting, coming back (الى to); recourse (الى to); traceability (الى to); revocation, withdrawal, retraction (عن of s.th.); resignation, surrender (عن of s.th.); reclamation; recall; restitution, return │البريد برجوع by return mail
رجيع rajī‘ excrement
مرجع marji‘ pl. مراجع marāji‘ return; authority to which one turns or appeals; place of refuge, retreat; recourse resort; authority, responsible agency; source (esp. scientific), authoritative reference work; resource; source to which s.th. goes back or to which s.th. can be attributed; starting point, origin; recourse (jur.) │ مرجع النظرm. An-naẓar jurisdiction, competence; اليه المرجع he is the one to turn to; في المرجع الى ذلك I am thereby referring to …; كان
was …, to due was this مرجع ھذا الشيء الى ul- (m. اليھم مرجع الفضل …; to attributable them to due is merit the faḍl)
مرجعية marji‘īya authority
مراجعة murāja‘a reiteration, repetition; inspection, study, examination; consultation (of a reference work); request; application, petition (esp. to an authority); application for advice or instruction, etc., consultation (of s.o.); checking, verification, re-examination; auditing, audit (also الحساب مراجعة); revision, correction (of a manuscript)
ارجاع irjā‘ return, restitution; refundment; attribution (الى to); reduction (الى to)
تراجع tarāju‘ withdrawal, retreat; recession, retrogadation
ارتجاع irtijā‘ return to an older form or order, reactionism, reaction
ارتجاعي irtijā‘ī reactionary 328
استرجاع istirjā‘ reclamation; recovery, retrieval; retraction, withdrawal, revocation
راجع rāji‘ returning, reverting, etc.; due, attributable (الى to); rightfully belonging ( الى to s.o.); subject (ل to s.th.); depending ( ل on) │ الراجعة الحمى (ḥummā) relapsing fever
 مراجع murāji‘ checker, verifier, examiner; reviser │ مراجع m. al-ḥisāb auditor, comptroller
رجف rajafa a (rajf, رجفان rajfān) to be convulsed, be shaken; to tremble, quake; to shiver, shudder; -- to agitate, convulse, shake (ه s.o.) IV to make (ه s.o.) tremble or shudder; to convulse, shake, rock (ھ s.th.); to spread lies, false rumors; also with ب, e.g., بافتراءات ارجف (bi-ftirā’āt) to spread calumnies VIII to tremble, quake; to shudder
رجفة rajfa (n. vic.) trepidation, tremor; shudder, shiver
رجاف rajjāf trembling, quaking; shaken, convulsed
ارجاف irjāf pl. اراجيف arājīf untrue, disquieting talk, false rumor
رجل rajila a to go on foot, walk II to comb (ھ the hair); to let down (ھ the hair), let it hang long V = I; to dismount (من or if from; rider); to assume masculine manners, behave like a man │في ترجل طريقه to walk all the way VIII to improvise, extemporize, deliver offhand ( ھ a speech) X to become a man, reach the age of manhood, grow up; to act like a man, display masculine manners or qualities
رجل rijl f., pl. ارجل ari"l foot; leg
رجل rijl pl. ارجال arjāl swarm (esp. of locusts); -- common purslane (Portulaca oleracea L.; bot.)
رجل rajil going on foot, pedestrian, walking
رجل rajul pl. رجال rijāl man; pl. رجاالت rijālāt great, important men, leading personalities, men of distinction │رجال الدولة r. ad-daula statesmen; السند رجال r. as-sanad informants, sources of information
رجالي rijālī men’s, for men (e.g., apparel)
رجولة rajūla masculinity, virility, manhood
رجولية rajūlīya masculinity, virility, manhood
مرجل mirjal pl. مراجل marājil  cooking kettle, caldron; boiler
ارتجال irtijāl improvisation, extemporization, extemporary speech
ارتجالي irtijālī extemporary, improvised, impromptu, offhand, unprepared
راجل rājil pl. رجل rajl, رجالة rajjāla, رجال rujjāl, رجالن rujlān going on foot, walking; pedestrian
مرتجل murtajal improvised, extemporaneous, extemporary, impromptu, offhand
 رجم raiama u (raim) to stone (ه a.o.); to curse, damn, abuse, revile (ه s.o.) │بالغيب رجم (gaib) to talk about s.th. of which one knows nothing; to guess, surmise, make conjectures; to predict the future II رجم بالغيب do.
رجم rajm stoning; (pl. رجم rujam) missile │ بالغيب رجم (gaib) conjecture, guesswork; prophecy
رجم rujum shooting stars, meteorites
rijām رجام rujam, رجم pl. rajma رجمة
tombstone
رجيم rajīm stoned; cursed, damned; see also alphabetically
  ترجمة ترجم، look up alphabetically
مرجونة marjūna basket 329
مرجاة rajāh, رجاة rajā’, رجاء( u rajā )رجا )رجو
marjāh) to hope; to hope for s.th. (ھ);
to .xpeat, anticipate (ھ s.th.), look forward (ھ to); to wish (ھ for s.th., ل ھ s.o. s.th., e.g., success); to ask (ھ for s.th., من or s.o., ان to do s.th.), request (ھ s.th., من from s.o., ان that he ...) │ في رجاه الحاح(ilḥāḥ) to plead with s.o., implore s.o.; المؤاخذة عدم اجو (‘adama l-mu’ākadata) │ I must ask your indulgence V to hope (ھ ه، for); to expect, anticipate (ھ ه، s.th., s.o.), look forward (ھ to); to request (ه s.o.); to ask (ه s.o.) VIII to hope (ھ ه، for); to expect, anticipate (ھ ه، s.th., s.o.), look forward (ھ to); to dread (ه s.o.)
رجا rajan and رجاء rajā’ pl. ارجاء arjā’ side, direction; region; -- pl. ارجاء arjā’ vastness (of a land), expanses; whole vicinity or area │ارجائه في about its interior, e.g., الغرفة ارجاء في (gurfa) all
 about the room, البالد ارجاء في all over the country, throughout the country; تجاوبت باتصفيق الردھة ارجاء (a. ur-radha) the entire auditorium resounded with applause; شاسع األرجاء and األرجاء واسع vast in extent, vast- dimensioned
رجاء rajā’ hope (في ب، and genit.; of); expectation, anticipation; urgent request │ رجاء على in the hope of, hoping for; رجاء العلم rajā’ al-‘ilm for your information (on memos, records, etc.); الصالح الرجاء رأس Cape of Good Hope
رجاة rajāh hope, expectation, anticipation
رجية rajīya s.th. hoped for; hope
مرجاة marjāh hope
راج rājin hoping, full of hope
مرجو marjūw hoped for, expected; requested │ان فضلك من المرجو (min faḍlika) approx.; I hope you will be kind enough to
...; ان مراعاة المرجو (murā‘ātu) please notice that …, attention is called to the fact that
…
رجي rajiya a to become silent; to remain silent; pass. عليه رجي (rujiya) to be tongue- tied, be unable to utter a sound
رجيم (Fr. régime) rijīm diet
رحب raḥiba a (raḥab) and raḥuba u (ruḥb, رحابة raḥāba) to be wide, spacious, roomy II to welcome (ب s.o., also ب s.th., e.g., news), bid welcome (ب to s.o.); to receive graciously, make welcome (ب s.o.) V to welcome (ب s.o.), bid welcome (ب to)
رحب raḥb wide, spacious, roomy; unconfined │ الصدر رحب r. aṣ-ṣadr generous, magnanimous; broad-minded, open-minded, liberal; frank, candid, open- hearted; carefree; رحب صدر (raḥb) generosity, magnanimity; open- mindedness, broad-mindedness, liberality; frankness, candor; الباع رحب generous, openhanded, liberal; الذراع رحب do.
رحب ruḥb vastness, wideness, spaciousness unconfinedness │ على اتى والسعة الرحب (atā, ṣa‘a) to be welcome; وجد وسعة رحبا (sa‘atan) to met with a friendly reception
رحب raḥab vastness, wideness, spaciousness, unconfinedness │الصدر رحب
r. aṣ-ṣadr magnanimity, generosity; lightheartedness
رحبة raḥba, raḥaba pl. -āt public square (surrounded by buildings); (pl. raḥabāt and رحاب riḥāb) vastness, expanse │رحاب الكون and الفضاء رحاب r. al-faḍā’ vastness of outer space
raḥb رحب = raḥīb رحيب
رحابة raḥāba wideness, vastness, spaciousness, unconfinedness │الصدر رحابة
r. aṣ-ṣadr magnanimity, generosity
بك مرحبا marḥaban bika welcome!
ترحاب tarḥāb welcome, greeting │قابله بترحيب (qābalahū) to receive s.o. with open arms
ترحيب tarḥīb welcoming, welcome, greeting 330
رحرح raḥraḥa: بالكالم رحرح (kalām) to equivocate, speak ambiguously, beat around the bush
رحرح raḥraḥ and رحراح raḥrāḥ wide, broad, flat; carefree, pleasant (life)
رحض raḥaḍa a (raḥḍ) to rinse, wash
marāḥīḍ  مراحض pl. mirḥāḍ مرحاض
lavatory, toilet
رحيق raḥīq exquisite wine; nectar
  رحلraḥala a (رحيل raḥīl) to set out; to depart, leave; to move away, emigrate; to start ( عن from a place) │ ويقيم يرحل رجل (yuqīm) a man constantly on the go, a dynamic man II to make (ه s.o.) leave, induce or urge (ه s.o.) to depart; to evacuate (ه الى
s.o. to), resettle, relocate (ه الى s.o. in); to deport (ه الى s.o. to); to allow (ه s.o.) to emigrate; to give (ه s.o.) travel clearance; to carry (passengers e. g., a ship); to transfer (ھ s.th.); to transport, convey, forward (ھ s.th.); to dispatch, send out (ھ s.th.); to carry over, post (ھ an item; bookkeeping); to carry forward (ھ the balance; bank) V to wander, roam, migrate, lead a nomadic life; to be evacuated VIII to set out, leave, depart; to move away, emigrate │ربه رحمة الى ارتحل (ilā raḥmati rabbihī) to pass away, die
 رحل raḥl pl. رحال riḥāl camel saddle; saddlebags; baggage, luggage; pl. stopping place, stop, stopover │الرحال شد (šadda) to set out, break camp; رحاله القى alqā riḥālahū to stop (في in, at)
رحلة riḥla travel, journey; trip, tour; travelogue
رحلة ruḥla destination, place for which one is bound
رحيل raḥīl departure, setting out; emigration; exodus; demise
رحال raḥḥāl pl. رحل riḥal roving, roaming, peregrinating, wandering, migratory nomadic; -- (pl. رحالة raḥḥāla) great traveler, explorer; nomad │الطيور الرحالة migratory birds; (العربان) األعراب الرحل (‘urbān) the nomadic Bedouins
رحالة raḥḥāla great traveler, explorer; globetrotter
مرحلة marḥala pl. مراحل marāḥil  a day’s journey; leg of a journey; way station; stage, phase │بمراحل عليه يزيد (yazīdu) it exceeds it by far; حياتھا مراحل في (ḥayātihā) throughout her life, in every stage of her life
ترحال tarḥāl departure, setting out │حياة الترحال ḥayāt at-t. nomadic life
ترحيل tarḥīl emigration, exodus; effectuation of (s.o.’s) departure; deportation; evacuation; resettlement; transfer; moving; transport, transportation; posting (of accounts); carrying forward (fin.); dispatch │عمال ترحيل t. ‘ummāl assignment (or detailing) of workmen
ارتحال irtiḥāl departure, setting out; emigration, exodus; demise
راحل rāḥil pl. رحل ruḥḥal departing leaving, parting; traveling; (pl. -ūn) deceased, late, الراحل الفقيد the deceased
راحلة raḥila pl. رواحل rawāḥil  female riding camel│راحلته شد (šadda) to saddle one’s camel, start out on a journey
مرحل muraḥḥal pl. -āt carry-over │ مرحل مجموع balance carried forward (fin.)
 راحيل rāḥīl Rachel
رحم raḥima a (رحمة raḥma, مرحمة marḥama) to have mercy (ه upon s.o.), have compassion
(ه for s.o.) ; to spare, let off (ه s.o.); to be merciful II عليه رحم to say to s.o.: ﷲ رحمك raḥimaka llāh may God have mercy upon you; to ask God to have mercy (على upon s.o.), plead for God’s mercy (على for what has happened) V = II; VI to show human understanding for one another, love and respect one another X to ask (ه s.o.) to have mercy 331
رحم raḥim, riḥm f., pl. ارحام arḥām uterus; womb; relationship, kinship │ذوو االرحام dawū l-a. relatives on the maternal side
رحمة raḥma pity, compassion; human understanding, sympathy, kindness; mercy
جعله mercy; s.o.’s at be to كان تحت رحمته│ s.o.’s to s.o. or s.th. leave to تحت رحمته pall بساط الرحمة mercy;
رحوم and ruḥamā’ رحماء pl. raḥīm رحيم
ruḥūm merciful, compassionate
الرحمن ar-raḥmān the Merciful (i.e., God)
مرحمة marḥama pl. مراحم marāḥim  pity, compassion, sympathy; mercy
ترحيم tarḥīm: الموتى ترحيم (mautā) pl. تراحيم tarāḥīm  intercessory prayer for the dead (Chr.)
استرحام istirḥām plea for mercy
مرحوم marḥūm deceased, late, e.g.,
… M. late the المرحوم السيد
رحى raḥan f., pl. ارحاء arḥā’, رحى ruḥīy, ارحية arḥīya quern, hand mill │ الرحى حجر ḥajar ar-r. millotone; القتال) الحرب رحى دارت) dārat r. l-ḥarb the war (fighting) broke out; the war (fighting) was going on
رحوى raḥawī rotating, rotatory
رحاوى raḥḥāy pl. -ūn grinder
رخ raḳḳa u to mix with water, dilute (ھ wine)
رخ raḳḳ (n. un. ة) light shower
رخ rukk roc, name of a fabulous giant bird; (pl. رخخة rikaka) rook, castle (chess)
رخاخ rakāk soft (ground); comfortable, pleasant, easy (life)
رخص rakuṣa (rukṣ) to be cheap, inexpensive; ( رخاصة rakāṣa) to be supple, tender, soft II to permit, allow (ل s.o. ب or في s.th.); to
 authorize, license (ل s.o., ب or في to do s.th.); to empower (ل s.o.); to reduce the price (ھ of s.th.) IV to reduce the price (ھ of s.th.) V to be willing to please, meet on fair term. (في مع s.o. in), show o.s. ready to compromise (مع with s.o. في in s.th.); to make concessions (في or ب in s.th.); to permit o.s. liberties, take liberties (في in) X to find cheap, regard as inexpensive (ھ s.th.); to request s.o.’s (ه) permission
رخص rakṣ supple, tender, soft
رخص rukṣ cheapness, inexpensiveness
رخصة rukṣa pl. رخص rukaṣ permission; concession, license, franchise; admission; authorization; leave; permit │قيادة رخصة السيارات r. qiyādat as-sayyārāt driving permit, operator’s license
رخيص rakīṣ supple, tender, soft, cheap, inexpensive, low-priced; base, mean, low; trash, trumpery
ترخيص tarkīṣ pl. -āt, تراخيص tarākīṣ  granting of permission; permission; authorization; mandate; concession; license; price reduction, price cut
مرتخص murtakiṣ low-priced, inexpensive, cheap │وغال مرتخص كل kullu murtakaṣin wa-gālin every conceivable effort, everything (in one’s power)
رخم rakuma u (رخامة rakāma) and rakama u to be soft, mellow, gentle, pleasant (voice); بيضھا على) بيضھا رخمت) rakamat baiḍahā (‘alā baiḍihā) to sit on the eggs (hen) II to soften, mellow (ھ the voice); to apocopate (ھ a word); to tile with marble (ھ the floor)
رخم rakam (coll.; n. un. ة) Egyptian vulture (Neophron percnopterus; zool.)
رخام rukām marble
رخام rukāma pl. -āt marble slab
رخيم rakīm soft, mellow, pleasant, melodious (voice); O note lowered by a semitone, flat (mus.) 332
ترخيم tarkīm shortening, apocopation, esp. of a name in the vocative by elision of the final consonant (gram.)
(رخو and رخو (رخي rakuwa u and رخي rakiya a (رخاوة rakāwa, رخاء rakā’) to be or become loose, slack, relaxed; to slacken, slump,
sag, relax; -- رخاء rakā’ u (رخاء rakā’): رخا عيشه (‘aišuhū) to live in easy circumstances, live in opulence IV to loosen, slacken (ھ s.th.); to relax (ھ s.th.); to let go (ھ s.th.); to lower, drop, let down (ھ s.th.) VI to slacken, sag, droop, become limp; to show little energy or zeal, let up, become lax, be remiss (عن in s.th.); to go down, slump (prices); to lag, become dull or listless (stock market); to diminish, flag, wane, ebb, decrease; to desist (عن from); to be lowered, drop, fall (curtain); to be delayed, be retarded VIII to slacken, slump, sag, droop, become limp, flaccid, flabby; to become loose, work loose; to soften, become soft; to relax, become relaxed, unbend; to abate, let up; to languish, nag, lose force or vigor X = VIII
رخو rakw, rikw loose, slack; limp, flabby, flaccid; indolent, languid; soft; supple
رخاء rakā’ ease, comfort, happiness; prosperity; abundance, opulence (of living); welfare; fairness, lowness (of prices)
رخاء rukā’ gentle breeze
رخاوة rakāwa softness; flaccidity, limpness; laxity │العود رخاوة r. al-‘ūd weakness of character
رخي rakīy feeble, weakened, languid; relaxed, at ease; cozy, comfortable
تراخ tarākin, limpness; slackness; languor, lassitude; abatement, mitigation, letup; relaxation; loosening, looseness
ارتخاء irtikā’ loosening, slackening; looseness, slackness; laxity; abatement mitigation, letup; ease, relaxedness; relaxation; limpness; languor, lassitude
irtikā’ ارتخاء = istirkā’ استرخاء
راخ rākin sagging, drooping
متراخ mutarākin limp, flaccid, flabby; drooping; languid; negligent, indolent, slack
رد radda u (radd) to send back; to bring back, take back (ه ھ، الى s.o., s.th. to); to return ( ھ الى s.th. to its place). put back, lay back ( ھ الى s.th. in its place); to throw back, repel, drive back, drive away (ه s.o.); to resist, oppose (ه s.o.); to turn down, refuse,
 decline (ھ s.th., e.g., the fulfillment of a wish); to ward off, parry, repel (ھجوما hujūman an attack); to reject (تھمة tuhmatan a suspicion); to hand back, give back, return, restore (ھ s.th., الى to s.o.); to return (السالم as-salāma the greeting); to reply (على to s.o.), answer (على s.o.); to reflect (ھ light); to throw back, echo (ھ the voice); to refute, disprove (على s.th.); to hold back, keep, restrain (ه عن s.o. from s.th.); to dissuade (ه عن s.o. from), prevail upon s.o. (ه) not to do s.th. (عن); to trace back, attribute (ھ الى s.th. to an origin); to bring, yield ( على ھ s.th. to s.o.); to reappoint, reinstate (ه ه s.o. as, e.g., حاكما ḥākiman as governor) │الباب رد to close  the door; جوابا رد (jawāban) to answer; ما شيئا عليك ھذا يرد this won’t help you at all; ال يرد (yuraddu) irrefutable; عقبيه على رده (‘aqibaih) pl. اعقابھم على ردھم (a‘qābihim) to drive s.o. back to where he came from; عنه عينه رد (‘ainahū) he averted his eyes from it II to keep away, avert, prevent, stave off (ھ s.th.); to repel, throw back (ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to repeat (constantly, frequently); to break forth, burst (ھ into, e.g., into singing), strike up, intone, let ring out (ھ a tune, or the like) │الصدى ردد (ṣadā) to return the echo; في النظر ردد (naẓara) to look at s.th. again and again; 333 بين طرفه ردد (ṭarafahū) to let one’s eyes wander between, look first at one, then at the other V to be thrown back, be reflected (voice, echo); to ring out (shouts); to shift repeatedly (wind); to come and go (على at s.o.’s house; rarely الى), frequent, visit frequently (على s.o.’s house, a place; rarely الى); to return, recur; to hesitate, be reluctant (في in s.th., to do s.th.); to waver, become uncertain, become doubtful في in s.th. or as to s.th.)
│األلسنة على تردد (alsina) to be frequently diocussed (question) VIII to withdraw, retreat, fall back; to move backward, retrogress; to go back, return, revert (الى to); to fall back (الى on); to go away, absent o.s.; to desist, refrain (عن from), renounce, give up, abandon, quit, leave (or s.th.); to forsake, desert (or one’s faith, one’s principles, etc.), apostatize, fall off ( عن from) │عقبيه على ارتد (‘aqbaihi), pl. اعقابھم على ارتدوا (a’qābihim) to withdraw, turn back X to reclaim, demand back, call
in (ھ s.th.), demand the return (ھ of s.th.); to bring back, lead back (الى ه s.o. to); to get back (ھ s.th.); to retrieve, recover, regain (ھ s.th.); to withdraw (e.g., يده yadahū one’s hand; also fig., e.g., استقالته istiqālatahū one’s resignation); to withdraw, take out (ھ money, from an account, from a bank) │انفاسه استرد (anfāsahu) to catch one’s breath
رد radd pl. ردود rudūd return; restoration, restitution; refund, reimbursement; repayment, requital; repulsion; warding off, parrying; denial, refusal; rejection; reply, answer; reflection (e.g., of light); refutation; attribution (الى to) │الفعل رد al-fi‘l reaction; االعتبار رد rehabilitation; على ردا (raddan) in reply
akada أخذ see اخذ ورد ...; to
ردة radda ugliness; reverberation, echo; bran
ردة ridda apostasy (االسالم عن or from Islam)
ارد aradd  more useful, more profitable (على to s.o.)
مرد maradd fact to which s.th. is attributable, underlying factor or reason; averting, rejection, repulsion; responsory (Chr.) │له مرد ال (maradda) irresistible;
الى مرده (maradduhū) it is attributable to ..., one must ascribe it to براعته اال له مرد ال (maradda, barā‘atuhū) it can only be attributed to his efficiency; لسانه مرد على كان (maraddi lisānihi) to be constantly on s.o.’s lips, be a standing phrase with s.o.
ترداد tardād frequent repetition; frequentation
ترديد tardīd repetition, reiteration
تردد taraddud frequent coming and going, frequentation; frequency (el.); hesitation, irresolution, indecision, wavering; reluctance
ارتداد irtidād retreat, withdrawal; retrogression; renunciation, desertion; apostasy (االسالم عن from Islam) │كارتداد الطرف ka-rtidādi ṭ-ṭarf in the twinkling of an eye, in a jiffy
استرداد istirdād reclamation, claim of restitution, vindication (Isl. Law); recovery, retrieval; retraction, withdrawal;
 refundment, reimbursement; withdrawal, taking out (of money, from an account)
مردود mardūd yield, return(s)
مرتد murtadd turncoat, renegade, apostate
 ردأ rada’a a (rad’) to support, prop, shore up (ھ a wall)
ردء rid’ pl. ارداء ardā’ support; help, helper
 ردؤ radu’a u (رداءة radā’a) to be bad V to become bad, be spoiled
رديء radī’ pl. اردياء ardiyā’  bad; mean, base, vile; evil, wicked; vicious, 334 malicious │السمعة رديء r. as-sum‘a of ill repute
اردأ arda’  worse; more wicked
رداءة radā’a badness; wickedness; viciousness, maliciousness
اردب irdabb (now commonly pronounced ardabb) pl. ارادب arādib  ardeb, a dry measure (Eg.; = 1981)
اردب irdabba cesspool
ردحا من الھر│ time of period long radaḥ ردح
radaḥan min ad-dahr for a long time
ردس radasa i u (rads) to crush (ھ. s.th.); to roll smooth, level by rolling (ھ ground)
ردع rada‘a a (rad‘) to keep, prevent (عن ه s.o. from) VIII to be kept, be prevented (عن from)
رادع rādi‘ deterring; (pl. روادع rawādi‘) deterrent; impediment, obstacle, handicap; restriction, limitation, curb, check; inhibition (psych.)
ردغة radga, radaga mud, mire, slush
ردف radafa u (radf) and radifa a to come next, come immediately after s.o. or s.th. (ه ھ،), follow, succeed (ه s.o., ھ s.th.) III to ride behind s.o. (ه on the same animal); to be the substitute (ه of s.o.), replace (ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to be synonymous (ھ with) IV to seat (ه s.o.) behind one (on an animal); to make (ه s.th.) be followed (ب by s.th. else); to complement, complete (ھ ب s.th. with or by) VI to follow one another, come in succession; to pile up in layers,
become stratified; to form a single line; to flock, throng (على to); to be synonymous
ردف ridf pl. ارداف ardāf rear man (riding on the same animal); one who or that which is subsequent, follows, comes next; posteriors, backside, rump; haunches, croup (of an animal); dual: الردفان ar-ridfān day and night
رداف ridāf croup, rump (of an animal)
رديف radīf rear man, one following next in line; redif, reserve (in the army of the former Turkish Empire)
رديف of fem. radīfa رديفة
ترادف tarāduf succession; synonymity
مرادف murādif synonym (of a word); synonymous, consignificant (ل with); corresponding in meaning, analogous
مترادفات synonymous; mutarādif مترادف
synonyms
ردم radama i u (radm) to fill up with earth (ھ pit, pond) II to repair, fix, mend IV not to leave (على s.o.), cling (على to s.o.; said of disease) V to be mended, be repaired; to repair, mend (ھ s.th.); to be worn, show signs of wear
ردم radm filling up (of swamps, ponds, etc.); rubble, debris; dam
رديم radīm worn, shabby, threadbare (garment)
ردن radana i (radn) to spin; to purr (cat); to grumble (على at)
ردن rudn pl. اردان ardān sleeve
ردينى rudainī spear (originally epithet for one of superior quality)
مردن mirdan pl. مرادن marādin  spindle
ردنجوت (Fr. redingote) redengōt frock coat,
Prince Albert
ردھة radha hall; large room, sitting room, parlor; lobby; entrance hall, vestibule │ االستقبال ردھة reception hall, drawing room, parlor المحاضرة ردھة r. al-muḥāḍarāt lecture room
ردي radiya a (ردى radan) to perish, be destroyed II to bring to the ground (ه s.o.), bring about the fan of (ه) IV to bring to the ground (ه s.o.), bring about the fall of (ه);
 to destroy, ruin (ه s.o.); to fell 335 (ه s.o.); to kill (ه s.o.) │قتيال اراده (qatīlan) to fell
s.o. with a deadly blow V to fall, tumble; to decline, fall off, come down, go from bad to worse; to deteriorate, become worse; to clothe o.s. (ب with), put on (ب a garment) VIII to put on (ھ a garment or headgear); to wear (ھ a garment, a headgear), be clothed, be clad (ھ in) │ مالبسه ارتدى (malābisahū) to put on one’s clothes, dress, get dressed
ردى radan ruin, destruction
رداء ridā’ pl. اردية ardiya loose outer garment, cloak, robe; (lady’s) dress, gown; attire, costume │المساء رداء al- masā’ evening gown
مترد mutaraddin dressed
رذ radda u: السماء رذت (samā’) and IV there was a drizzle, it drizzled
رذاذ radād drizzle
رذل radila a and radula u (رذالة radāla) to be low, base. vile. despicable. Contemptible;
-- radala u (radl) to reject, cast off, discard, repudiate, disown (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to despise, disdain, scorn (ه ھ، s.o. s.th.); to disapprove (ه ھ، of) IV to reject, cast off, discard, repudiate, disown (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) X to regard as low or despicable (,ھ ه s.o., s.th.)
رذل radl rejection; repudiation; (pl. رذول rudūl, ارذال ardāl) low, base, mean, vile, despicable, contemptible
رذيل radīl pl. رذالء rudalā’ low, base, mean, vile, despicable, contemptible, depraved
رذالة radāla lowness, baseness, meanness, vileness, depravity
رذالة radīla pl. رذائل radā’il vice; depravity
مرذول mardūl depraved, despicable, mean, base, vile, evil, wicked
  رز ruzz (= ارز) aruzz) rice
 رز razza u (razz) to insert, drive in (ھ s.th.) II to burnish, polish (ھ s.th.) IV to telephone
رزة razza pl. -āt staple, U bolt; ring screw; joint pin
O ارزيز irzīz telephone
رزأ raza’a a (رزء raz’) to deprive (في or ھ ه
s.o. of s.th.); pass. رزئ ruzi’a to incur or suffer loss; to lose (ب s.th.); to be afflicted (ب by)
رزء ruz’ pl. ارزاء arzā’ heavy loss, serious damage; disaster, calamity
رزيئة razī’a and رزية razīya pl. رزايا razāyā heavy loss, serious damage; disaster, calamity
رزب razaba u (razb) to keep, stick, cling (ھ to)
مرزبة mirzabba pl. مرازب marāzib  iron rod
marāzīb  مرازيب pl. mirzāb مرزاب
waterspout, gargoyle; (roof) gutter
رزح razaḥa a (رزوح ruzūḥ, رزاح ruzāḥ, razāḥ) to succumb, collapse, sink to the ground (under a burden); to descend, hover (e.g., silence) III to suffer
مرزغ marzig muddy, boggy, miry
رزق razaqa u to provide with the means of subsistence (ه s.o.; said of God); to bestow (ھ ه upon s.o. s.th., material or spiritual possessions; said of God), endow (ھ ه s.o. with); to bless (ھ ه s.o. with, esp. مولودا with a child); -- pass. ruziqa to be endowed (ھ with); to live VIII to make a living, gain one’s livelihood; to live (من on or by s.th.) X to seek one’s livelihood; to ask for the means of subsistence
رزق rizq pl. ارزاق arzāq livelihood, means of living, subsistence; daily bread, nourishment, sustenance; boon, blessing 336 (of God); property, possessions, wealth, fortune; income; pay, wages │ ناشفة ارزاق dry rations, emergency rations (mil.)
الرازق ar-rāziq the Maintainer, the Provider (one of the 99 attributes of God)
ارترزاق istirzāq independent livelihood, self- support
مرزوق marzūq blessed (by God), fortunate, prosperous, successful
مرتزق murtaziq hired, hireling, mercenary, kept
مرتزقة murtaziqa kept persons, hangers-on; mercenaries
 مرتزق murtazaq means of subsistence, livelihood, living
رزم razama i u (razm) to bundle, bale, pack, wrap up (ھ s.th.)
رزمة rizma pl. رزم rizam bundle; bale, pack; parcel, package; ream (of paper)
رزن razuna u (رزانة razāna) to be grave, serious, sedate, staid, calm, composed, self-possessed V to display grave or sedate manners, show o.s. calm, composed, self-possessed
رزين razīn grave, serious, sedate, staid; composed, calm, self-possessed
رزانة razana gravity, sedateness, staidness; composure, self-possession, poise
روزنامة see ruznāma رزنامة رزيئة see رزايا pl. رزية
رسيس rasīs covered with verdigris
رسب rasaba u (رسوب rusūb) to sink to the bottom, settle, subside (esp., in water); to fail, dunk (in an examination) II to cause to settle (ھ s.th., in a liquid), deposit (ھ a sediment); to precipitate (ھ s.th.; chem.) V to settle, subside, be deposited; to precipitate (chem.)
رسوب rusūb sediment, deposit; lees, dregs, settlings; precipitate (chem.); failure (in an examination)
ترسيب tarsīb sedimentation; precipitation (chem.)
راسب rāsib pl. رواسب rawāsib  sediment, deposit; dregs, lees, settlings; precipitate (chem.); residue
رستامية rustāmīya to tidy, arrange well, put in order (ھ s.th.)
رستق rastaqa to tidy, arrange well, put in order (ھ s.th.)
روستو رستو، (It. arrosto) rostō roast meat رستوران (Fr. restaurant) restorān restaurant مرسح marsaḥ (= مسرح) pl. مراسح marāsiḥ 
theater, playhouse; stage; party, social gathering
مرسحي marsaḥī social, party (used attributively); formal (dress)
رسخ rasaka u (رسوخ rusūk) to be firmly established, be deeply rooted (في in s.th.); to be firm, solid, stable; to be conversant, be thoroughly familiar (في with s.th.), be well versed, be at home (في in s.th., in a field); to seep in; to permeate (في a fabric); to become fast (color or dyes in a fabric) II and IV to make (ھ s.th.) take root(s), establish (ھ s.th.); to implant (ھ s.th.); to secure, make fast, fix firmly, ground (ھ s.th.) │ذھنه في الشيء ارسخ (dihnihī) to impress or inculcate s.th. upon s.o.
ارسخ arsaka more firmly established, more deeply rooted │قدما ارسخ (qadaman) do.
راسخ rāsiq, firmly established, deep- rooted; grounded, firmly fixed, stable; conversant (في with s.th.), thoroughly versed, completely at home (في in a field)
رسراس risrās (eg.) glue, adhesive, specif., one for pasting leather, made of a yellow powder 337
wrist arsug ارسغ arsāg, ارساغ pl. rusg رسغ
رسف rasafa u i to go in shackles; to be bound; to be moored (ship)
رسل rasila a (rasal) to be long and flowing (hair) III to correspond, carry on a correspondence, exchange letters (ه with s.o.); to contact (ه s.o.), get in touch (ه with s.o.) IV to send out, dispatch (ب or ه ھ، s.o., s.th. الى, also ل, to); to send off, send away (ب or ھ, .s.o., s.th. الى, also ل, to); to send, forward, ship (ب or ھ s.th. الى, also ل, to); to send, transmit (radio); to release, let go (ھ s.th.); to set free (ھ s.th.); to discharge (ھ s.th.); to pour forth, vent (ھ s.th.), give vent (ھ to); to utter (ھ words); to shed (ھ tears); to let (ھ the hair) hang down, let it fall (على on) │طلبه في ارسل (ṭalabihī) to send for s.o.; ارساال الكالم ارسل (al-kalāma irsālan) to speak without restraint, talk freely; طبيعتھا مع نفسه ارسل (nafsahū) to yield to one’s natural impulse, do the natural thing; على ارسل سجيته (sajīyatihī) to make s.o. feel at home; سجيتھا على نفسه ارسل (nafsahū) to feel at home, let o.s. go V to proceed leisurely, take one’s time (في in s.th.); to hang down, be long and flowing (hair) VI to keep up a correspondence, exchange letters; to send to one another, exchange (ب s.th.) X to ask
 (من s.o.) to send (ھ s.th.), have s.o. (من) send (ھ s.th.); to be relaxed, at ease, free from restraint; to be long and flowing (hair); to be friendly, affable, intimate, chummy (الى with s.o.); to act naturally, without affectation; to let o.s. go; to enlarge (الكالم في fī l-kalām in discourse, i.e., to talk at length); to abandon o.s., give
o.s. up (في to s.th., also مع or الى); to persist (في in s.th.), keep up (في s.th.)
رسل rasl easy, gentle, leisurely (pace, gait); loose, slack, relaxed; long and flowing (hair)
رسل risl moderation │رسلك على! slowly! gently! take it easy!
رسيل rasīl pl. رسالء rusalā’  messenger; runner (mil.)
رسول rasūl pl. رسل rusul messenger; emissary; envoy, delegate; apostle (Chr.); الرسول or ﷲ رسول the Messenger of God (i.e., Mohammed)
│ (Chr.) papal apostolic, rasūlī رسولي apostolic (baraka) البركة الرسولية Holy the (sudda) السدة الرسولية benediction; delegate apostolic قاصد رسولي See;
رسالة risāla pl. -āt, رسائل rasā’l  consignment, shipment; mail item; (written) communication, (written) report; missive; letter, note; epistle; dispatch; message; treatise; radio message; (pl. -āt) mission, calling, vocation │برقية رسالة (barqīya) telegram; غرامية رسالة (garāmīya) love letter; مسجلة رسالة (musajjala) registered letter
القى الخبر على رسيالته rusailāt: رسيالت matter the take didn’t he (kabara) seriously
O مرسال mirsāl: نور مرسال m. nūr, pl. -āt searchlight
مراسلة murāsala exchange of letters, correspondence; note, message, letter, communication; orderly (mil.)
ارسال irsāl sending, forwarding, shipping, dispatch
ارسالية irsālīya pl. -āt consignment; mail item; shipment; transport; (mil.) expedition; mission
ترسل tarassul art of letter writing
استرسال istirsāl ease, naturalness, relaxedness; abandon; elaboration, expatiation
مراسل murāsil pl. -ūn correspondent, reporter (of a newspaper) │حربي مراسل (ḥarbī) war correspondent; خاص مراسل (kāṣṣ) 338 special correspondent; مراسل رياضي (riyāḍī) sports reporter
مرسل mursil sender (of a letter); consignor; O transmitter (radio)
O مرسلة mursala pl. -āt transmitter (radio)
مرسل mursal sent, forwarded; dispatched; delegated; transmitted (radio); long and flowing (hair); (pl. -ūn) millionary (Chr.); incompletely transmitted (of a Prophetic tradition resting on a chain of authorities that goes no further back than the 2  generation after the Prophet) │اليه المرسل recipient, addressee (of a letter); consignee; كالم مرسل (kalām) prose
مرسلية mursalīya mission
مسترسل mustarsil loose, flowing (hair); friendly, affable; intimate, chummy; devoted, given up (في or مع to s.th.)
رسم rasama u (rasm) to draw, trace (ھ s.th.); to sketch (ھ s.th.); to describe (ھ e.g., a circle); to paint (ھ s.th.); to record, put down in writing (ھ s.th.); to enter, mark, indicate (ھ s.th.); to sketch, outline (ھ s.th.; fig.); to describe, depict, portray, picture (ھ s.th.); to make, work out, conceive (خطة kiṭṭatan a plan); to prescribe (ب or ھ ل to s.o. s.th.), lay down as a rule (ب or ھ ل for s.o. s.th.); to ordain (ه a priest; Chr.) │الصليب شارة رسم to make the sign of the cross, cross o.s. (Chr.) II to enter, mark, indicate (ھ s.th., في in); to appoint to a public office (ھ s.o.; tun.) V to follow (ھ s.th., esp. s.o.’s footsteps, an example, etc.); to be appointed to a public office (tun.) VIII to come out, find visible expression; to be traced, engraved, inscribed, written; to impress itself, leave an impression (على on); to be ordained, be introduced into the office of the ministry (priest; Chr.); to make the sign of the cross (Chr.)
رسم rasm drawing (e.g., as a subject in school); -- (pl. رسوم rusūm, رسومات
 rusūmāt) a drawing; sketch; graph; picture; photograph; illustration; pattern (e.g., on a fabric); -- (pl. رسوم) trace, impression) designation, mark; inscription, legend; record, notes; (official) document, (legal) instrument; writing; design; prescription, regulation; ceremony, form, formality; rate, fee, tax, due │برسم bi-rasmi intended for, care of (c/o), for; الرسم اخذ akd ar-r. taking of a picture; بياني رسم (bayānī) illustrative figure, diagram (in a book); الدخول رسم admission fee; دخولي رسم (dukūlī) import duty, tariff; شمسي رسم (šamsī) photograph; عمومي رسم layout, ground plan (arch.); رسم تفصيلي detail drawing; قلبي رسم (qalbī) cardiogram; قيدية رسوم (qaidīya) registration fees; اإلنتاج رسم r. al-intāj excise tax; قيمي رسم (qaimī) ad valorem duty; ھزلي رسم (hazalī) caricature, cartoon
رسمي official, formal, conventional; ceremonial; official, officeholder, public servant; رسميا ramīyan officially; رسميات rasmīyāt formalities; ceremonies, ceremonial, ritual; rules, regulations │ رسمية رجال officials; رسمية مالبس official dress; court dress; رسمية ثياب uniforms; شبه رسمية šibh r. and بالرسمي شبيه semi-official; رسمي نصف niṣfu r. do.; رسمي غير gairu r. unofficial
رسام rassām pl. -āt draftsman; painter, artist
رسامة risāma, rasāma ordination, consecration (of a priest; Chr.)
روسم rausam pl. رواسم rawāsim  O cliché (Syr.)
مرسم marsam studio (of an artist)
مراسم marāsim  ceremonies, ceremonial, ritual; etiquette, protocol (dipl.); customs; principles; regulations │ المراسم ادارة مدير mudīr idārat al-m. and ٩٣٣ المراسم رئيس chief of protocol (dipl.); التتويج مراسم coronation ceremonies; مراسم التشريفات court etiquette
ترسم tarassum design, planning
ارتسام irtisām pl. -āt (visible) expression, manifestation (e.g., of a feeling, of an emotion on s.o.’s face)
مرسوم marsūm drawn, traced, sketched; painted; recorded in writing, written; designed, planned; decreed, ordered; -- (pl. مراسيم marāsīm ) decree; act, edict; regulation, ordinance (ب regarding); مراسيم ceremonies, ceremonial, ritual; etiquette; regulations │بقانون مرسوم (bi-qānūn) enactment, statute, ordinance (Eg.); مرسوم تشريعي (tašrī‘ī) and اشتراعي مرسوم (ištirā‘ī; Pal., Syr.) do.; المراسيم مدير mudīr al-m. chief of protocol (dipl.)
رأس مال = rasāmīl  رساميل pl. rasmāl رسمال □
capital (fin.)
ارسنة arsān, ارسان arson, ارسن pl. rasana رسن
arnsina halter
رسو) رسا) rasā u (rasw) to be firm, stable, steady; to anchor (على off a coast), cast anchor, land, dock; to ride at anchor (على off a coast, في in a harbor); to disembark, land (ب s.o.; ship); to come or go eventually (على to), land (على with) │رسا المزاد عليه (mazād) it was knocked down to him (at an auction); المناقصة عليه رست (munāqaṣa) the commission or contract went to him (after an invitation to submit tenders) IV to make fast, fix firmly (ھ s.th.); to anchor, place at anchor (ھ a ship)
مرسى marsan pl. مراس marāsin anchorage │مطروح مرسى Mersa Matrûh (village in NW Egypt, on Mediterranean coast)
مرساة mirsāh pl. مراس marāsin anchor
راس rāsin pl. رواس rawāsin fixed, stationary, immovable, firm, steady, stable, firmly established; anchored, at anchor; pl. راسيات rāsiyāt, رواس rawāsin towering, unshakable mountains
رسا =) رسى see above) to anchor
رش rašša u (rašš) to spatter, splash, spurt (ھ a liquid); to spray (ھ a liquid); to sprinkle ( ھ s.th., ب with, على on); to splatter, spatter, bespatter (ھ s.th., ب with water, etc.); to water (ھ s.th.)
رش rašš sprinkling; watering; splattering, spattering; spraying; buckshot
│والكنس الرش مصلحة maṣlaḥat ar-r. wa-l- kans street-cleaning department; الرش عربة ‘arabat ar-r. watering cart, sprinkler; رمى رشا to fire in bursts (mil.)
 رشة rašša light drizzle
رشاش raššāš spattered liquid; drizzle, dribble (esp. fig.)
رشاش raššāš pl. -āt water hose; machine gun │رشاش مدفع (midfa‘) machine gun; رشاش مسدس (musaddas) pl. مسدسات رشاشة submachine gun, Tommy gun
رشاشة raššāša pl. -āt perfume spray, atomizer; O watering can; shower, douche (Mor.)
O مرشة mirašša watering can
رشح rašaḥa a (rašḥ) to sweat, perspire; to leak, be leaky (vessel); to filter, strain, percolate (ھ a liquid) II to raise, rear, bring up (ه a child); to train, prepare (ه s.o.); to nominate, put up as a candidate (. s.o., ل for, e.g., for an office), (with نفسه nafsahū) to be a candidate, apply (ل for an offioe. etc.); to filter (ھ s.th.) V to be reared, be brought up; to be suited, qualified, trained (ل for s.th.); to be nominated as a candidate, be a nominee (ل for s.th.); to catch a cold
رشح rašḥ secretion (of a fluid); perspiration, sweating; leaking, leakiness; filtering, filtration, percolation; oozing, trickling; cold, catarrh 340
رشاحة rušāḥa transudate, transudation (med.)
ترشيح taršīḥ training, preparation; nomination (as a candidate, for election); (= نفسه ترشيح) candidacy, candidature; election; concession
ترشح taraššuḥ infiltration (med.)
ارتشاح irtišāḥ infiltration (med.)
مرشح muraššiḥ pl. -āt filter; percolator; filtering installation; purification plant
مرشح muraššaḥ pl. -ūn candidate, nominee; having a cold
مترشح mutaraššiḥ pl. -ūn candidate, nominee
رشد rašada u (rušd) to be on the right way, follow the right course, be well guided, not go astray (esp., in religious matters); to have the true faith, be a true believer; to become sensible, become mature, grow up; to come of age II to lead the right way,
guide well (ه s.o.) IV to lead the right way, guide well (ه s.o.); to load, guide, direct (الى • s.o. to s.th.), show (ه s.o.) the way (الى to; fig.); to lead s.o. (ه) to the discovery that (ان الى), suggest to s.o. the idea of, make s.o. realize that; to calls.o.’s (ه) attention (الى to s.th.), point out (ه الى to
s.o. s.th.); to teach (ه الى s.o. to do s.th.), instruct, (direct, guide (ه الى s.o. in); to inform (ه الى s.o. about), acquaint s.o. (ه) with the facts of (الى); to advise, counsel ( ه الى s.o. to do s.th.); to inform (الى against s.o.); to come of age X to ask (ه or ب s.o.) to show the right way, ask s.o. for guidance or directions; to ask (ه s.o.) for instructions or information; to consult (ه s.o.), ask s.o.’s (ه) advice, seek guidance (ه from s.o.); to be guided (ب by)
رشد rušd integrity of (one’s) actions, proper, sensible conduct; reason, good sense, senses; consciousness; maturity (of the mind) │الرشد سن sinn ar-r. majority, full legal age; رشده بلغ (rušdahū) to come of age; رشده الى ثاب to come to one’s senses, calm, down, sober up; رشده ضاع to go out of one’s mind; برشده ذھب to drive
s.o. mad (pain)
رشد rašad integrity of conduct, straightforwardness, forthrightness
رشاد rašād integrity of conduct; reason, good sense, senses; maturity; garden peppergrass (Lepidium sativum L.; bot.)
رشيد rašīd rightly guided, following the right way; having the true faith; reasonable, rational, intelligent, discriminating, discerning; mature; (pl. رشداء rušadā’) of full legal age, major; Rosetta (city in N Egypt)
مراشيد marāšid  where the right way leads to; salvation
ترشيد taršīd a declaring (s.o.) of age (jur.)
ارشاد iršād guidance; a conducting, showing the way (الى to); guiding hand; care; spiritual guidance; instruction; direction; directive; information; advising, advice; pl. ارشادات) directives, directions, instructions, advice │بإرشاده on his instructions, following his direction; وزارة
 al-qaumī al-i. wizārat اإلرشاد القومي
Ministry of National Guidance (Eg.)
ارشادي شعر ši‘r iršādī didactic poetry
راشد rāšid following the right way, rightly guided, having the true faith; sensible, reasonable; of full legal age, major │الراشدون الخلفاء (kulafā’) the orthodox caliphs (i.e., Abū Bakr, ‘Umar, ‘Utmān, ‘Alī)
مرشد muršid pl. -ūn leader; guide to the right way; adviser; spiritual guide; informer; instructor; (ship) pilot; tourist guide; Grand Master, Master (e.g., of the Moslem Brotherhood)
مرشدة muršida woman guide 341
رشرش rušruš pl. رشرش rašārīš  belt
رشراش rašrāš tender (e.g., meat)
رشف rašafa i u (rašf) and rašifa a (raša), V and VIII to suck, sip (ھ s.th.); to drink (ھ s.th.); to drink up, drain (ھ a vessel)
رشفة rašfa (n. un.) pl. -āt gulp, sip (of a drink) رشق rašaqa u (rašq) to throw (ب ه at s.o. s.th.), pelt, strike, hurt (ب ه s.o. with s.th.); to
insert, fasten. fix (ھ في s.th. in); -- rašuqa u (رشاقة rašāqa) to he shapely, of graceful stature; to he elegant, graceful, lissome VI to pelt one another, hurt one another
رشيق rašīq elegant, graceful (exterior, style); svelte, slender, slim; lissome
رشاقة rašāqa elegance, grace, gracefulness; shapeliness graceful, slender build; nimbleness, agility
رشم rašama u (rašm) to mark, designate (ھ s.th.); to make the sign of the cross; to seal (ھ s.th.) │على بصليب رشم to make the sign of the cross over; الصليب رشم to make the sign of the cross (Chr.)
رشمة rašm pl. رشوم rušūm, رشومات rušūmāt sign of the cross (Chr.); anointment (Copt.-Chr.)
رشمة rašma ornamental halter decorated with silver pendants, or the like; camel halter
راشن rāšin tip, baksheesh
رشو) رشا) rašā u (rašw) to bribe (ه s.o.) VIII to accept as bribe, he corrupt, he venal
رشو rašw bribery, corruption
رشوة rišwa, rušwa, rašwa pl. رشى رشا، rišan, rušan, (eg.) رشاوى rašāwā bribe; bribery, corruption, dishonesty
رشاء rišā’ rope, well rope
ارتشاء irtišā’ venality, corruptibility; bribery, corruption
رص raṣṣa u (raš□ṣ) to fit tightly together, press together, compress (ھ s.th.); to ram, force ( ھs.th. into the ground); to pile up, stack up (ھ s.th.); to join together, line up, align, arrange .ide by side (ھ s.th.) II to fit tightly together, press together, compress ( ھ s.th.); to ram home (ھ s.th.); to coat or cover with lead (ھ s.th.) VI to be pressed together, be packed together; to press together, crowd together; to be or become compact
رصاص raṣāṣ lead; bullets │ رصاص قلمqalam r. pencil
رصاصة raṣāṣa (n. un.) pellet; bullet
رصاصي raṣāṣī lead, (made) of lead; leady; leaden, lead-colored, dull gray
رصيص raṣīṣ compressed, closely packed, jammed together; compact
O تراص tarāṣṣ agglutination
رصد raṣada u (raṣd) to keep one’s eyes (ه ھ، on); to lie in wait (ه for); to observe (ھ s.th.). watch (ھ s.th. or over s.th.), control (ھ s.th.); to conjure (ه demon) │ رصد األفالك to observe the stars, practice astronomy II to provide, set aside, earmark (ھ funds); to prepare, keep ready (ھ s.th.); to balance (الحساب the account; com.) IV to keep ready (ھ s.th.); to provide, set aside, earmark (ل ھ s.th., esp. funds, for); to procure, get (ھ s.th.) V األفالك ترصد to observe the stars, practice astronomy
رصد raṣd, raṣad pl. ارصاد arṣād observation │ األفالك رصد r. al-aflāk stargazing, astronomy; جوية ارصاد (jawwīya) meteorological observation; األرصاد تقرير weather report
رصدخانة raṣdakāna observatory
رصد raṣad pl. ارصاد arṣād spy, watcher, watchdog; lookout, observation post; ambush; talisman 342
 al-jaww r. رصاد الجو raṣṣād: رصاد
meteorologist
رصيد raṣīd pl. ارصدة arṣida stock on hand (of merchandise, of supplies); avaible funds; balance (com.; also = remainder of a sum to be paid later); capital (fin.) │ رصيد يدون شيك uncovered check, check without sufficient covering funds
مرصد marṣad pl. مراصد marāṣid   observatory │ جوي مرصد(jawwī) meteorological station, weather station
O مرصد marṣad telescope
look- post, observation mirṣād مرصاد wait; in lie to وقف المرصاد │ ambush out; in lie to وقف له بالمرصاد and كان منه بالمرصاد s.o. waylay s.o., for ambush
راصد rāṣid registering; (pl. رصاد ruṣṣād) watcher, watchdog, spy │O خزينة راصدة cash register; O راصد ميزان (mīzān) self-registering balance
(falakīya) راصدة فلكية rāṣida: راصدة telescope
مرصود مبلغ mablag marṣūd security, cover (fin.)
رصع II to inlay, set, stud (ھ s.th., ب with gems or gold); to adorn, decorate, ornament (ھ ب s.th. with)
رصف raṣafa u (raṣf) to pave, lay with stone (ھ s.th.); -- raṣufa u (رصافة raṣāfa) to be firmly joined II to lay with flagstones, pave (ھ s.th.)
رصف raṣf paving (of roads)
رصيف raṣīf firmly joined, firm, solid, compact; -- (pl. ارصفة arṣifa) pavement; sidewalk; quay; wharf, pier; mole, jetty; platform; (pl. رصفاء ruṣafā’) colleague │ المحطة رصيف r. al-maḥaṭṭa (railway) platform; البحر في الحفر ألعمال رصيف (li- a‘māli l-ḥafr fī l-baḥr) offshore drilling platform (for oil drilling); الرصيف عوائد ‘awā’id ar-r. quayage, pierage, wharfage
رصيفة raṣīfa pl. -āt woman colleague │ الغراء رصيفتنا (garrā’) a phrase of courtesy used by one newspaper when referring to another; approx.: our honorable friends
رصافة raṣāfa firmness compactness
مرصوف marṣūf paved (ب with)
رصن raṣuna u (رصانة raṣāna) to be firm, strong; to be sedate, calm, composed
رصين raṣīn firm, unshakable; sedate, calm, composed
رصانة raṣāna sedateness, composure, calmness, equanimity
رض raḍḍa u (raḍḍ) to crush (ھ s.th.); to bruise (ھ a part of the body)
رض raḍḍ pl. رضوض ruḍūḍ bruise, contusion
رضيض raḍīḍ crushed; bruised
رضاب ruḍāb spittle, saliva
رضخ raḍaka a i (raḍk) to break, smash, shatter (ھ s.th.); to crack (ھ a kernel); -- raḍaka a (raḍk) to give (ھ s.o.) a small, paltry present; -- (ruḍūk) to yield, bow, give in, subordinate o.s., submit (ل to s.o., to s.th.) VIII لكنة ارتضخ (luknatan) to speak Arabic with a foreign accent
رضخ raḍk, رضخة raḍka a small, paltry gift
رضيحة raḍīka a small, paltry gift; tip, baksheesh
رضوخ ruḍūk submission, surrender; yielding, compliance; sympathetic understanding (ل of)
مرضاح mirḍāk nutcracker
رضرض raḍraḍa to break into coarse pieces, pound, crush (ھ s.th.)
رضراض raḍrāḍ pebbles, gravel 343
رضع raḍi‘a a and raḍa‘a i a (raḍ‘, رضاع raḍā‘) to suck (أمه ثدي tadya ummihī at its mother’s breast) II and IV to nurse at the breast, suckle, breast-feed (ه a baby)
رضيع raḍī‘ pl: رضعاء ruḍa‘ā‘ , رضائع raḍā’i‘  suckling, infant, baby; foster brother
O رضاعة raḍā‘a pl. -āt nursing bottle
رضاع riḍā‘ foster relationship
راضع rāḍi‘ pl. رضع ruḍḍa‘ sucking; suckling, infant, baby; infant (adj.)
مرضع murḍi‘ and مرضعة murḍi‘a pl.
مراضع marāḍi‘  wet nurse; foster mother
 رضى see رضي ﷲ عنه of abbreviation رضه riḍan رضى see رضا
رضي raḍiya a (رضى riḍan, رضوان riḍwān, مرضاة marḍāh) to be satisfied, be content ( ب ھ، or في with); to consent, agree (ب ھ، or في to); to approve (ب ھ، or في of), accept, sanction (ب ھ، or في s.th.); to accept the fact, resign o.s. to the fact (ان that); to be pleased (على ھ، or عن with); to wish, desire (ھ s.th., ل for s.o.) │لنفسه رضي ب (li-nafsihī) to permit o.s. s.th.; لھا رضي ما المذلة (madalla) he had no desire to humiliate her; ابى او رضي (au abā) whether he likes it or not; عته ﷲ رضي (Isl. eulogy) may God be pleased with him; من رضي باإلياب الغنيمة (iyāb) to be content to return without booty, be happy to have saved one’s skin n to satisfy, gratify, please (ه s.o.); to compensate (ه s.o.) III to seek to satisfy, try to please (ه s.o.); to propitiate, conciliate, win (ه s.o.), gain the good will of (ه) IV to satisfy, gratify, please (ه s.o.) V to seek to satisfy, try to please (ه s.o.); to seek to propitiate (ه s.o.); to conciliate. appease (ه s.o.) VI to come to terms VIII to be satisfied, content, pleased (ھ with); to consent, agree (ھ to s.th.); to approve ( ھ of s.th.), sanction (ھ s.th.) X to seek to satisfy, try to conciliate, treat in a conciliatory manner (ه s.o.); to conciliate, appease (ه s.o.); to show o.s. obliging, make o.s. popular, ingratiate o.s., try to gain good will or favor
رضا رضى، riḍan contentment, contentedness, satisfaction; agreement, consent, assent, acceptance, approval; pleasure, delight; good will, favor │عن رضى readily, gladly; الرضى سريع easy to please, easily reconciled
رضي raḍīy pl. ارضياء arḍiyā’  satisfied, content; pleasant, agreeable │راضية بنفس (bi-nafs) gladly
رضوان riḍwān consent, assent, agreement, acceptance, approval, sanction; good will, favor; pleasure, delight
مرضاة marḍāh a means affording satisfaction or gratification; satisfaction, pleasure
ترضية tarḍiya satisfaction, gratification; compensation
رضاء riḍā’ contentment, contentedness, satisfaction; agreement, consent, assent, acceptance, approval, sanction; propitiation, conciliation
بالمراضاة bi-l-murāḍāh by fair means, amicably
إرضاء irḍā’ satisfaction, gratification; fulfillment (of a claim, of a desire) │صعب االرضاء ṣa‘b al-i. hard to please, fastidious
تراض tarāḍin mutual consent
استرضاء istirḍā’ conciliatory attitude, conciliatoriness; propitiation, conciliation
استرضائي istirḍā’ī conciliatory
راض rāḍin pl. رضاة ruḍāh satisfied, content; agreeing, consenting; willing, ready; pleasant, agreeable (life)
مرض murḍin satisfactory; satisfying; pleasant, pleasing, gratifying, sufficient 344
رطب raṭiba a and raṭuba u (رطوبة ruṭūba, رطابة raṭāba) to be moist, damp, humid; to be wet II to moisten (ھ s.th.); to cool, refresh; to soothe, soften, calm (القلب al- qalba the heart); to become succulent, mellow, ripen (dates) IV to moisten (ھ s.th.); to become succulent, mellow, ripen (dates) V to be moistened; to be cooled, be refreshed; to be soothed, be softened, be calmed
رطب raṭb moist, damp, humid; wet; fresh, cool; juicy, succulent, tender (plant)
رطب ruṭab (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. ارطاب
arṭāb, رطاب riṭāb fresh, ripe dates
رطيب raṭīb pl. رطاب riṭāb moist, damp, humid; fresh, cool; juicy, succulent, tender (plant)
رطوبة rṭūba moisture, dampness, humidity; wetness
راطب rāṭib moist, damp, humid; wet
مرطبات muraṭṭibat refreshments, soft drinks
رطل raṭl pl. ارطال arṭāl rotl, a weight (in Eg. =
449.28 g; in Syr. = 3.202 kg, in Beirut and Aleppo = 2.566 kg)
 رطم raṭama u (raṭm) to involve, implicate, drag (في ه s.o. into s.th. unpleasant) VIII to tumble, fall, plunge (في into); to stick fast, be stuck; to be involved, be entangled (في in s.th.); to run aground, strand (ship); to bump, hit, crash (ب against)
O مرطم marṭam breakwater, mole, jetty
رطن raṭana u (رطانة raṭāna, riṭāna) to speak unintelligible language, talk gibberish, jabber
رطانة raṭāna, riṭāna lingo, gibberish
رطينى rujainā lingo, gibberish
رعاع ra‘ā‘ rabble, mob, riffraff, scum, ragtag; rowdies, hooligans
رعب ra‘aba a (ru‘b) to be alarmed, terrified; to be afraid, be scared II and IV to frighten, scare, terrify (ه s.o.) VIII to become frightened, become alarmed, be afraid
رعب ru‘b fright, alarm, dismay
ارعاب ir‘āb frightening, intimidation راعب rā‘ib dreadful, horrifying, terrible مرعوب mar‘ūb frightened, terrified,
appalled, afraid
مرعب mur‘ib frightening, terrifying, terrible, horrible, dreadful
رعد ra‘ada a u (ra‘d) to thunder; to appall (ل ب s.o. with) IV to make (ه s.o.) tremble; pass. ur‘ida to shudder, shiver, tremble ( من with, e.g., with fear) VIII to tremble
رعد ra‘d pl. رعود ru‘ūd thunder
رعدة ra‘da, ri‘da tremor; shudder; shiver
رعاد ra‘‘ād (coll.; n. un. ة) electric ray (zool.)
ra‘ādīd  رعاديد pl. ri‘dīd رعديد
cowardly; coward
رعرع ra‘ra‘a to come into the prime of life (youth) II tara‘ra‘a to grow, develop, flourish, thrive
رعرع ra‘ra‘, ru‘rū‘ pl. رعارع ra‘āri‘  in full bloom
ايوب رعراع ra‘rā‘ ayyūb (eg.) a variety of fleabane (Pulicaria arabica Coss., Pulicarla inuloides D.C.; bot.)
رعش ra‘aša a (ra‘š) and ra’iša a (ra’aš) to tremble, shake IV to make (ه s.o.) tremble; to make (ه s.o.) shiver VIII = ra’aša
al- r. رعشة الحمى│ tremor ri‘ša رعشة
ḥummā feverish shiver
ارتعاش irti‘āš tremor, trembling
رعص V and VIII to writhe, wind, coil 345
رعف ra‘afa u a and ra‘ifa a: انفه رعف (anfahū) to have a nosebleed
رعاف ru‘āf and رعيف ra‘īf nosebleed
راعف rā‘if tip of the nose
رعلة ru‘la wreath
رعيل ra‘īl pl. رعال ri‘āl squadron of armored, motorized, or cavalry troops (Syr., Ir.; mil.)
رعام ru‘ām gladers
رعمسيس ra‘amsīs Ramses (name of Eg. kings)
رعن ra‘ana u (رعونة ru‘ūna) to be lightheaded, frivolous; -- ra‘ana u (ra‘n): الشمس رعنته ra‘anathu š-šamsu to have a sunstroke
رعن ra‘n sunstroke; -- (pl. رعان ri‘ān) mountain peak
ارعن ar‘an  lightheaded, frivolous, flippant, rash, heedless, careless; stupid, silly; thoughtless; unsteady, fickle, volatile
رعونة ru‘ūna pl. -āt levity, frivolity, flippancy; thoughtlessness
رعو) رعا) ra‘ā u (ra‘w, رعوة ra‘wa, ru‘wa, رعوى ra‘wā, ru‘wā) and IX ارعوى ir‘awā to desist (من or عن from sin, from error), repent, see the light │غيه عن ارعوى (gayyihī) to repent, turn over a new leaf
رعوى ra‘wā, ru‘wā repentance, amendment, conversion
رعى see رعوية and ra‘awī رعوى مرعى ri‘āya, رعاية (ra‘y, a ra‘ā رعى
mar‘an) to graze; to tend (ھ a flock of animals); -- (ra‘y, رعاية ri‘āya) to guard, protect, take under one’s wing (ه s.o.); to care (ه ھ، for), take care (ه ھ، of); to watch (ھ over); to male a point (ھ of s.th.), make it one’s business; to observe, bear in mind, heed, respect (ھ s.th.); to adhere (ھ to), comply (ھ with), abide (e.g., عھدا ‘ahdan
 or معاھدة mu‘āhadatan by a treaty or an agreement, etc.); to take into consideration (ھ s.th.), allow (ھ for s.th.) in to supervise, watch, control (ھ s.th.), keep an eye (ھ on); to maintain, keep up, preserve (ھ s.th.); to observe, bear in mind, heed, respect (ھ s.th.), comply (ھ with, e.g., with regulations); to take into consideration, take into account (ھ s.th.), allow, make allowance (ھ for s.th.); to show deference, regard or respect (ه for s.o.); to make provision, see to it (ان that)
│خاطره راعى (kāṭirahū) to defer to s.o., respect s.o.’s feelings or wishes IV ارعيته سمعى ar‘aituhū sam‘ī I listened to him; سمعك ارعنى ar‘inī sam‘aka listen to me! نظره ھ ارعى (naẓarahū) to follow s.th. attentively with one’s eyes VIII to graze, pasture (cattle) X to attract (نظره naẓarahū s.o.’s eyes, انتباھه intibāhahū s.o.’s attention); to observe (ھ s.th.)
رعى ra‘y care, keeping, custody, guardianship; protection; observance (ل of), adherence (ل to, e.g., to agreements)
│ لك رعيا God be with you!
رعية ra‘īya pl. رعايا ra‘āyā herd, flock; parish (Chr.); subjects, citizens; a subject, a citizen
رعائى and ra‘āwī رعاوى ra‘awī, رعوي كنيسة رعائية │ bucolic pastoral, ra‘ā’ī pastoral رسالة رعائية (Chr.); church parish (Chr.) letter
مرعى mar‘ā pl. مراع marā‘in grassland, grazing land; pasture
رعاية ri‘āya keeping, custody, charge, care; attention, consideration, regard; patronage, auspices, sponsorship, protectorate │رعاية تحت under the auspices of, sponsored by; الطفل رعاية مركز markaz
r. al-ṭifl health center for children (Eg.); رعاية األكثر الدول معاملة شرط šarṭ mu‘āmalat ad-duwal al-aktar ri‘āyatan most-favored nation clause 346
مراعاة murā‘āh consideration, regard, deference, respect; compliance (with), observance (e.g., of regulations, of duties, etc.) │ ل مراعاة (murā‘atan) in deference to, out of regard for, for the lab of; in observance of; لخواطرھم مراعاة out of deference to them, out of regard for their
feelings, wishes, etc.; ھذا مراعاة مع taking this into account, bearing this in mind
راع rā‘in pl. رعاة ru‘āh, رعيان ru‘yān, رعاء ru‘ā’, ri‘ā’ shepherd, herdsman; guardian, keeper, protector; patron, sponsor; pastor (Chr.)
مرعى mar‘ā observed, complied with
رغب ragiba a (رغبة ragba, رغب ragab) to desire, wish, want, crave, covet (في s.th.); to ask (من or الى s.o., في for s.th., ان to do s.th.), request (في s.th.; من or الى s.o., ان to do s.th.); to prefer (على في s.th. to, also ب عن s.th. to), like s.th. (في, also ب) better than (على, also عن); to dislike, detest, loathe (عن s.th.), have a distaste (عن for); to wish (ب ل s.o. s.th.) │فيه يرغب ال (yurgabu) undesirable II to make (ه s.o.) desirous (في of), awaken a desire, a wish (ه في in s.o. for); to interest (في ه s.o. in s.th.), excite s.o.’s (ه) interest in (في); to awaken an aversion (عن ه in s.o. to s.th.) IV = II
رغب ragab: ورھبا رغبا ragaban wa- rahaban torn between greed and fear
رغبة ragba pl. ragabāt wish, desire, longing, appetite (في for)
رغيبة ragība pl. رغائب ragā’ib  object of desire, desideratum; wish, desire
ترغيب targīb awakening of a desire or longing (في for); incitement to covetousness; invitation, attraction
راغب rāgib pl. رغبة desiring, desirous │ راغب آلخر li-ākiri rāgibin (sale) to the highest bidder
مرغوب margūb: فيه مرغوب coveted, sought after, in demand; desired, desirable; فيه مرغوب غير undesirable; شخص فيه مرغوب (šakṣ) persona grata, غير شخص فيه مرغوب persona non grate (dipl.); مرغوب عنه undesirable, unwanted, objectionable, loathsome
مرغبات muraggibāt attractions, lures, advantages
رغث ragaṭa a (rugt) to suck (ھا at the mother’s teats; said of animals)
رغوث ragūt unweaned young female animal
رغد raguda u (رغادة ragāda) and ragida (rugd) to be pleasant, comfortable, carefree (life)
 رغد ragd easy, carefree, pleasant, agreeable (life) │ رغد عيش(‘aiš) a life of plenty and opulence
رغيد ragīd easy, carefree, pleasant, agreeable (life) │ رغيد عيش (‘aiš) a life of plenty and opulence
رغد ragad comfort, opulenoe, affluence (of living)
رغادة ragāda comfort, opulence, affluence (of living)
 رغرغ ragraga to live in opulence and luxury  □ رغرغ ragraga (= غرغر gargara) to gargle ارغاطة urgāṭa pl. –āt, اراغيط arāgīṭ (eg.)
windlass, winch; capstan
رغف rugfān, رغفان argifa, ارغفة pl. ragīf رغيف
ruguf loaf of bread; roll, bun (syr.)
رغم IV to foroe, compel, coerce (على ه s.o. to do s.th.)
رغم ragma (prep.) despite, in spite of │ان رغم although, though; عن رغما ragman ‘an in spite of, despite; انفه عن رغما (anfihī) and انفه من الرغم على just to spite him, in defiance of him, against, his will; من بالرغم bi-r-rami min and عن بالرغم and الرغم على من despite, in spite of; ھذا كل من بالرغم in 347 spite of all this; منه بالرغم and الرغم على منه against s.o.’s will; against one’s own will, reluctantly, without wanting it; على مني رغم ‘alā ragmin minnī without my wanting it; من بالرغم in spite of the fact that, although; رغما اال ... ال lā … illā ragman only reluctantly, only with great effort
رغام ragām dust and sand
رغام rugām mucus
رغامى rugāmā windpipe, trachea (anat.)
مرغمة margama pl. مراغم marāgim  compulsion, coercion, force; aversion, unwillingness, reluctance, dislike, distaste
ارغام irgām compulsion (على to)
راغم rāgim reluctant, unwilling │وانفه راغم (anfuhū) (as a ḥāl clause) reluctantly, grudgingly
ارغن look up alphabetically
رغو) رغا) ragā u (ragw) to foam, froth II and IV do. │وازبد ارغى (azbada) to fume with rage
رغو ragwa, rugwa pl. رغاو ragāwin
foam, froth, spume; lather; dross, slag
رغوي ragwī foamy, frothy
رغاء raggā’ windbag (fig., of a person); garrulous; chatterbox, prattler
رغاوة rugāwā foam, froth, spume
راغية وال ثاغية له ما :راغ (tāgiya) he has absolutely nothing, he is devoid of all resources, prop.: he has neither a bleating (sheep) nor a braying (camel)
رف raffa i (raff, رفيف rafīf) to gleam, shimmer, glisten, glitter; -- u i (raff) to quiver, twitch; to flicker; to flap the wings (bird); to flutter; to wave, stream; to flash, flare for a moment; to appear suddenly; -- u I to be anxious to please (ل s.o.). serve (ل s.o.) diligently │ذاكرته على رف it flashed through his mind, it occurred to him all of a sudden
رف raff flight, covey (of birds)
رف raff pl. رفوف rufūf, رفاف rifāf shelf; rack; ledge │ الرف على وضعه to shelve s.th., put s.th. aside
رفاف raffāf radiant, flashing, sparkling, glistening
رفأ rafa’a a (raf’) to mend, repair, patch (ھ clothing), sew up, fine-draw (ھ a rent), darn (ھ socks); to drag (ھ a boat) on shore
رفاء raffā’ darner, fine-drawer
رفاء rifā’ (marital) harmony, love │ والبنين بالرفاء (banīn) live in harmony and beget sons! (felicitation to newlyweds)
مرفأ marfa’ pl. مرافئ marāfi’  landing place wharf, quay; port, harbor
 رفت rafata i u (raft) to break, smash, crush (ھ s.th.); to reject, turn down, decline (ھ s.th.); to dismiss, discharge (ھ s.o. from service)
رفت raft dismissal, discharge (from service)
رفت rufāt mortal remains, body (of a person)
  رفتية raftīya transit duty; clearance certificate, clearance papers (com.)
رفث rafata i u to behave in an obscene manner
رفث rafat obscenity
رفح rafaḥ Rafah (town in S Gaza sector)
رفد rafada i (rafd) to support, aid, help (ه s.o.); to support, uphold, carry (ه s.th.) IV to support, aid, help (ه s.o.) X to ask (ه s.o.) for support, appeal (ه to s.o.) for help
arfād ارفاد rufūd, رفود pl. rifd رفد
present, gift; support
رفادة rifāda dressing, bandage (over a wound); saddlecloth, pad 348
رافد rāfid pl. روافد rawāfid  tributary stream; الرافدان ar-rāfidān (Euphrates and Tigris = ) Mesopotamia, Iraq
رافدة rāfida pl. روافد rawāfid  support, prop; rafter
رفرف rafrafa to flap the wings (bird); to flutter (flag, wings, or the like); to blow (wind); to blindfold (ھ the eyes)
رفرفrafrāf pl. رفارف rafārif   cushion, pad; eyeshade, visor (of a cap); fender (of an automobile)
رفروف rafrūf pl. رفاريف rafārīf  eye bandage
رفس rafasa i u (rafs) to kick (ه s.o.)
رفس rafsa (n. vic.) kick
رفاس raffās steam launch, steamboat; motor tug; O propeller
رفش rafš shovel, spade
رفاص raffāṣ (= رفاس raffās) steam launch, steamboat
رفض rafaḍa i u (rafḍ) to leave, abandon (ھ s.th.); to discard, dismiss (ھ s.th.); to reject, turn down, decline, refuse to accept (ھ s.th.) IV to finish, conclude, terminate V to he bigoted, fanatic IX to scatter, disperse, break up; to disappear, cease (e.g., pain); to drip (sweat)
رفض rafḍ dismissal; rejection, refusal, nonacceptance
رفيض rafīḍ abandoned; rejected, dismissed
ترفض taraffuḍ bigotry, fanaticism
رافضة rāfiḍa pl. روافض rawāfiḍ  turncoats, renegades, dissenters, defectors; troops having deserted their leader;
Rafidites, a Shiitio sect
رافضي rāfiḍī pl. ارفاض arfāḍ apostate, renegade, turncoat; Rafidite; disloyal, rebellious; bigoted, fanatical
رفع rafa‘a a (raf‘) to lift, lift up, raise aloft, heave up, hoist up (ھ s.th.); to raise (ھ s.th., e.g., one’s head, also fig.: e.g., the intellectual level, a price); to raise in esteem (ھ s.th.); to make high or higher ( ھ s.th.); to elevate (ھ s.th.); to heighten, exalt, enhance (ھ s.th.); to raise, promote ( الى ه s.o. to the rank of); to fly, let up (ھ, e.g., a kite); to hoist, run up (علما ‘alaman or راية rāyatan a flag); to take off, doff, tip (قبعته qubba‘atahū one’s hat); to place, fasten or attach (ھ s.th.) high above; to erect, set up (ھ s.th.); to raise (صوته ṣautahū one’s voice); to remove, take away (عن or من ھ s.th. from); to abolish, eliminate (ھs.th.); to lift (ھ s.th., e.g., a ban), put an end (ھ to s.th.); to remedy (ھ a mistake); to free, relieve (ھ عن s.o. of s.th.); to put s.th. (ھ) before s.o. (الى), submit (الى ه s.th., e.g., a petition, to), file ( الى ھ a report, and the like, with a proper authority); to present, dedicate (الى ھ s.th. to s.o.); to offer up (ھ sacrifices; Chr.); to make, deliver (تقريرا a report); to start, initiate (قضية qaḍīyata legal action); to ascribe (الى ھ a Prophetic tradition to an authority or source); (gram.) to pronounce the final consonant with u; to put (ھ a word) in the nominative or indicative, respectively; pass. rufi‘a it appeared, came in sight, became visible (ل before s.o.); عنه رفع rufi‘a ‘anhu he regained consciousness │شيء فوق شيئا رفع to put s.th. before or above s.th. else; رأسا به رفع (rafa‘a) to pay attention to s.th.; شأنه من رفع (min ša’nihī) to enhance the importance of s.th.; to speak of s.th. in glowing terms; مكانته من رفع (makānatihī) to upgrade s.th.; عنه يديه رفع (yadaihī) to desist, refrain from s.th.;  عليه الدعوى رفع (da‘wā) to sue s.o., lodge a complaint against s.o. (امام in a court); عليه قضية رفع (qaḍīyatan) or به رفع قضية to bring legal action against s.o., go with s.o. to court; االستئناف رفع to appeal, 349 make an appeal (امام to a court) II to
 raise, lift;, elevate; to celebrate carnival III to act as defence counsel (عن of s.o.), defend (عن s.o., in court), plead s.o.’s (عن) cause; to summon, hale (الى ه s.o. to court) V to be or deem o.s. above s.th. (عن), be too proud (عن for s.th.), look down (عن upon) │برأسه ترفع to raise or bear one’s heed high VI to hale one another before the judge (الحاكم الى); to take one’s case before the judge (الحاكم الى); to plead (in court) VIII to rise, lift; to go up, ascend; to become higher; to grow, increase, rise; to ring out (tone, voice, tune); to go away, pass away, be eliminated, disappear (عن from) │صوته ارتفع (ṣautuhū) to gain prestige
رفع raf‘ lifting, hoisting (also, of a flag); elevation; raise, raising, stepping up (of prices, of temperatures, etc.); setting up; erection; abolition; lift, (e.g., of a ban); remedy, elimination, removal; remission (of a tax); submission, filing (e.g., of a report); pronunciation of the final consonant with u (gram.) │األثقال رفع weight lifting (athlet.)
رفعة rif‘a height, elevation (e.g., of a structure); high rank or standing │ صاحب الرفعة (formerly:) title of the Egyptian Prime Minister, الوزراء رئيس رفعة rif‘at raīs al-wuzarā’ His Excellency the Prime Minister
رفاع rifā‘ Shrovetide (Chr.)
رفيع rafī‘ high, high-ranking; lofty, exalted, sublime; loud (voice, sound); thin, fine, delicate; exquisite, refined, subtle; artistic │الشأن رفيع r. aš-ša’n approx.: exalted; formerly, in Tunisia, title of the members of the Bey’s family; صاحب الرفيع المقام (maqām) title conferred upon bearers of the order القالدة al-qilāda, established by Fu’ād I in 1936; الرفيعة الفنون الجميلة الفنون =)) the fine arts; والوضيع الرفيع high end low (= all)
ارفع arfa‘ higher; loftier, more exalted; liner; more relined, subtler
رفيعة rafī‘a pl. رفائع rafā’i‘  legal case brought before the competent authorities; a document submitted to a proper authority
مرفع marfa‘ Shrovetide (Chr.); carnival, pl. مرافع marāfi‘  do.
مرفعة mirfa‘a pl. مرافع marāfi‘  hoisting gear, crane
ترفيع tarfī‘ pl. -āt promotion (of an official); salary raise (الى to the amount of)
مرافعة murāfa‘a pl. -āt speech for the defense (in court); proceedings at law │يوم المرافعة yaum al-m. date fixed for the trial (of a case in court); المرافعة قانون (Eg.) and المرافعة مجلة majallat al-m. (Tun.) code of procedure
ترفع taraffu‘ arrogance, haughtiness, snobbery (عن toward s.th.), disdain, contempt (عن of s.th.)
ارتفاع irtifā‘ rise (e.g., of prices); elevation; increase; height, altitude (e.g., of a mountain, البحر سطح عن ‘an saṭḥI l- baḥr above sea level, etc.) │ ارتفاع على ... at an altitude of ...
رافع rāfi‘ bearer │رافعة آلة hoisting gear, lifting apparatus, hoist; windlass, winch; crane; pump; رافعة مضخة (miḍakka) suction pump
رافعة rāfi‘a pl. روافع rawāfi‘ hoisting gear, lifting apparatus, hoist; crane; hoisting installation (mining) │O رافعة ھوائية (hawā’īya) ejector; O الغام رافعة r. algām mine sweeper
مرفوع marfū‘ traceable in ascending order of traditionaries to Mohammed (Prophetic tradition); (gram.) in the nominative or indicative, respectively
= (ša’nuhū) المرفع شأنه muraffa‘: مرفع
350 rafī‘) رفيع (see الرفيع الشأن
مرافع murāfi‘ plaintiff
مترفع mutaraffi‘ haughty, arrogant, snobbish
مرتفع murtafi‘ rising, ascending; high, elevated; resounding, ringing │ الحديد سكة المرتفعة (sikkat al-ḥadīd) elevated railway
مرتفع murtafa‘ height, altitude; elevated place; O terrace; pl. -āt heights, elevations, hills
رفق rafaqa u (rifq) and rafiqa a (rafaq) to be kind, friendly, nice (ب to s.o., also على and ل), treat gently (ب s.o.,), be courteous (ب
 with s.o.) III to be a companion, a comrade (ه of s.o.); to keep (ه s.o.) company; to be on intimate terms, be hand in glove, be friends, associate closely (ه with s.o.); to accompany (ه s.o.; also mus.); to escort (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) IV to be of use, be useful (ه to s.o.), avail, serve, help (ه s.o.); to accompany (ب ھ s.th. with);: to attach, enclose, add, append (ب ھ to s.th. s.th.) V to show o.s. kind, display a gentle, friendly attitude (ب toward s.o., also مع), be nice (ب to s.o., also مع); to do gently (في s.th.), proceed gently (في in) │سيره في ترفق (sairihī) to walk slowly, stroll, saunter VI to travel together VIII to profit, benefit, gain (ب from or by), make use, avail o.s., take advantage (ب of), utilize (ب s .h.); to lean one’s elbows, rest one’s arms (ھ on s.th.)
رفق rifq friendliness, kindness, gentleness │ بالحيوان الرفق جمعية jam‘īyat ar-r. bi-l-ḥayawān Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
رفقة rifqa, rufqa pl. رفاق rifāq, رفق rifaq, rufaq, ارفاق arfāq group, troop, body (of people); company │ برفقة accompanied by, in the company of
رفيق rafīq pl. رفقاء rufaqā’ , رفاق rifāq companion, attendant; escort; buddy, friend; comrade (in Marxist terminology); associate, partner; accomplice; kind (ب to), mild, gentle, tender │المدرسة رفيق r. al- madrasa classmate, schoolmate
رفيقة rafīqa pl. -āt woman companion; girl friend; sweetheart; mistress, par amour
مرفق mirfaq, marfiq elbow; -- mirfaq pl. مرافق marāfiq  anything conducive to personal ease and comfort, convenience;
appurtenance (of an apartment, of a house; such as kitchen, bathroom, stable, etc.); attainment of civilization, civilizational institution; pl. مرافق attainments of civilization; conveniences; public utilities; installations; facilities │مرافقھم على القيام (qiyām) concern for their welfare; مرافق الحياة m. al-ḥayāh conveniences, anything conducive to personal ease and comfort; العامة المرافق (‘āmma) the public utilities; التكرار مرافق refining facilities (oil industry)
مرافقة murāfaqa accompaniment; escort; company, association
ارتفاق irtifāq utilization, use; usefulness, serviceableness; easement (jur.)
مرافق murāfiq pl. -ūn companion, attendant; escort; accompanist; adjutant, aide (Ir.)
به مرفق murfaq bihi attached, enclosed; pl. مرفقات enclosures (in a letter, or the like)
مرتفق murtafaq that on which one leans or rests; support; toilet, latrine
رفل rafala u (rafl) to trail a garment; to strut, swagger
رفل rifl train (of a garment)
رفه rafuha u (رفاه rafāh, رفاھة rafāha, رفاھية rafāhīya) to be comfortable, pleasant, luxurious (life) II to make (ھ life) pleasant and comfortable; to afford (ه s.o.) a pleasant, luxurious life; to be a source 351 of ease and comfort, make things easy ( عن على، for s.o.), let (على, s.o.) live in comfort; to relax (عن على، s.o.), provide recreation (عن على، for); to ease soften, mitigate (ھ عن for s.o. s.th.); to cheer up ( عن s.o.), raise the spirits of (عن); to soothe (عن the soul) │نفسه عن رفه to relax, find recreation (ھ from work); نفسه على رفع to find recreation
رفه rifh and رفاه rafāh well-being, welfare; personal ease and comfort; good living, luxury, comforts of life
رفاھة rafāha, رفاھية rafāhīya comfortable, luxurious life; luxury; comfort, comfortableness, coziness; complete relaxation and ease
ترفيه tarfīh creation of ease and luxury; habituation to luxury; providing of comfort and relaxation; recreation; (mental) relaxation │العيش ترفيه t. al-‘aiš good living, comfortable life; الترفيه قسم qism at-t. recreation department
رفو) رفا) rafā u (rafw) to darn, mend (ھ s.th.)
رق raqqa i (رقة riqqa) to be or become thin, delicate, fine; to be tender, soft; to be pure, clear, limpid (water); to soften, relent (ل toward s.o.), have pity, feel compassion, have sympathy (ل for) │له رق
 قلبه (qalbuhū) he took pity on him II to make thin. thin out (ھ s.th.); to refine, make fine, soft or tender, render delicate ( ھ s.th.); to polish, smooth, make elegant ( ھ one’s speech); to flatten, roll out (ھ esp. metal) IV to make thin, line or tender, render delicate, refine (ھ s.th.); to soften ( ھ the heart) V to soften, relent (ل toward s.o.). have pity, have sympathy (ل for), sympathize (ل with) X to be thin, fine, delicate; to soften (ھ s.th.); to enslave, make a slave (ھ s.o.)
رق raqq pl. رقوق ruqūq turtle
رق riqq quality or condition of being a slave, slavery, bondage
رق raqq, riqq parchment; riqq (eg.) tambourine
رق riqqa thinness; slenderness, slimness; fineness, delicateness, delicacy; gentleness, mildness; amiability, graciousness, friendliness │الحاشية رقة r. al-ḥāšiya friendliness, courteousness, amiability; الشعور رقة sensitivity, delicacy of feeling, tact; الطبع رقة r. aṭ-ṭab‘ kindness, gentleness, mild temper, friendliness; المزاج رقة gentleness, mild temper
رقاق ruqāq flat loaf of bread; O waffles
رقيق raqīq pl. ارقاء ariqqā’ , رقاق riqāq slave, slaves (sing. and coll.); flat loaf of bread (mid); thin; slender, slim; line, delicate; soft. tender, gentle; sensitive, tactful, discreet, prudent │الرقيق تجارة slave trade; الحال رقيق poor, needy; الحاشية رقيق الحواشي)) r. al-ḥāšiya (al-ḥawāšī) friendly, courteous, civil, amiable; الشعور رقيق sensitive; الطبع رقيق r. aṭ-ṭab‘ kind, gentle, mild-tempered, friendly; المزاج رقيق gentlehearted
رقيقة raqīqa lamina, flake
ارق araqq  thinner; slimmer; more delicate
مرقاق mirqāq rolling pin
مرقوق marqūq thin, flaky pastry
رقأ raqa’a a to cease to flow (tears)
رقب raqaba u (رقوب ruqūb, رقابة raqāba) to observe, watch, regard attentively (ھ s.th.); to supervise, control (ھ s.th.); to
wait (ھ for), await (ھ s.th.); -- (رقوب ruqūb) to watch (ھ over s.th.), guard (ھ s.th.); to take into consideration, heed, observe, respect (ھ s.th.); to fear (ه God); to be on one’s guard, watch out, be careful
│ذمة وال إال فيه يرقب ال (illan wa-lā dimmatan) to treat s.o. ruthlessly ill to watch, observe, regard attentively (ه s.o., ھ s.th.), keep an eye (ه ھ، on); to make out, detect (ھ s.th.); to control 352 (ھ s.th., e.g., the traffic, the press, s.o.’s doings, etc.), supervise (ھ some work), have an eye (ھ on, e.g., on s.o.’s dealings); to fear (ه God) │ فيه ﷲ راقب (lit.: to fear God with regard to s.o.) to treat s.o. well for fear of God V to expect, anticipate, await (ھ s.th.), look forward to (ھ), wait, look, look out (ه ھ، for); to regard (ھ s.th.), look (ھ at s.th.); to lie in wait (ه for) VIII to expect, anticipate (ھ s.th.)
رقبة riqba observation; control; attention; caution, wariness; vigilance, watchfulness
رقبة raqaba pl. -āt, رقاب riqāb neck; -- (pl. رقاب) slave; (īsl. Law) person │O رقبة جسر r. jisr bridgehead; الرقبة صلب ṣulb ar-r. stubborn, obstinate, obstreperous; غليظ الرقبة do.; رقابھم في ھذا responsibility for it rests on their shoulders; برقاب بعضھم أخذ بعض akada ba‘ḍuhum bi-r. ba‘ḍin to follow in close succession
رقوب ruqūb anticipation, expectation
رقيب raqīb pl. رقباء ruqabā’  vigilant, watchful; guardian, keeper, warden; watcher, observer, lookout; spy; overseer, supervisor, inspector; controller, control officer; postal censor; sergeant (Syr., mil.)
│اول رقيب (awwal) approx.: staff sergeant (Syr., mil.)
رقبى ruqbā donation with the proviso that it shall either revert to the donor after the donee’s death or become the property of the donee upon death of the donor (Isl. Law)
رقابة raqāba supervision, control; censorship (of the press)
رقوبة raqūba and راقوبة rāqūba (eg.) nest egg
 مرقب marqab and مرقبة marqaba lofty observation post, lookout; watchtower; O observatory
مرقب mirqab telescope
مراقبة murāqaba observation; supervision; surveillance; inspection; control; censorship (of the Press); mail censorship; superintendency, controllership; zone of inspection
ترقب taraqqub expectation, anticipation ارتقاب irtiqāb expectation, anticipation مراقب murāqib pl. -ūn observer;
overseer, supervisor, inspector; controller, control officer; censor; sergeant major, quartermaster sergeant (Eg. 1939) │مراقب تعليم m. ta‘līm a military rank (approx.: master sergeant; Eg. 1939); تعيين مراقب m. ta‘yīn a military rank (approx.: quartermaster sergeant; Eg. 1939); مراقب مدني (madanī) title of a high local official (Mor., Tun.); الخطوط مراقب linesman (soccer)
رقد raqada u (raqd, رقود ruqūd, رقاد ruqād) to sleep, be asleep; to go to bed; to lie down to rest; to lie; to rest; to abate, subside, let up, calm down (e.g., a storm); to be down, be flagging; to be dull, listless (market) │ البيض على رقد (baiḍ) to sit on the eggs (hen) II to put (ه s.o.) to sleep; to make (ه s.o.) lie down; to put (ه s.o.) to bed; to lay down, stretch out (ه s.o.) IV to put to sleep (ه s.o.); to put to bed (ه a child)
رقدة raqda sleep; manner of lying, lying position
رقاد ruqād sleep; recumbency, recumbent position
رقود ruqūd sleep; recumbency, recumbent position; sleeping, sleep (pl. of the active participle)
راقود rāqūd pl. رواقيد rawāqīd  large jug
مرقد marqad pl. مراقد marāqid  bed; couch; resting place; mausoleum
ترقيد tarqīd (eg.) layerage (hort.) │ترقيد البيض t. al-baiḍ hatching of the eggs 353
ترقيد tarqīd (tarqīd) layer (hort.)
ruqūd رقود ruqqad, رقد pl. rāqid راقد
sleeping, asleep; lying, reclining,
recumbent; resting; quiet, dull, listless (market)
مرقد muraqqid somniferous, lulling; pl.
soporifics مرقدات
رقرق raqraqa to mix. dilute (ھ wine with water) II taraqraqa to overflow (بالدموع with tears; eyes), be bathed (بالدموع in tears); to glitter, glisten, sparkle: to stir gently, breathe (wind)
رقراق raqrāq bathed (in tears), moist, misty (eyes); glittering, glistening; radiant, brilliant, resplendent
رقارق raqāriq not deep, shallow (water)
رقش raqaša u to variegate, make multicolored (ھ s.th.) II do.; to adorn, embellish, decorate (ھ s.th.)
ارقش arqaš  variegated, multicolored, colorful
marāqīš  مراقيش pl. mirqāš مرقاش O
brush (of the painter)
رقص raqaṣ u (raqṣ) to dance; to prance (horse; على to a tune) │ فرحا رقص (faraḥan) to dance with joy II to make (ھ s.o.) dance; to set (ھ s.th.) in a swinging motion; to make (ھ the heart) tremble │ الحناجر رقص (prop.: to make the throats tremble) to provoke loud laughter III to dance (ھا with a girl) IV = II; VI to move; to dance; to prance; to tremble (heart)
معلم الرقص │ dance dancing, raqṣ رقص
mu‘allim ar-r. dancing instructor
رقصة raqṣa (n. vic.) pl. raqaṣāt dance
رقاص raqqāṣ (professional) dancer; pendulum (phys.; also of a timepiece)
رقاصة female dancer; dancing girl, danseuse; ballerina
مرقص marqaṣ, pl. مراقص marāqiṣ 
dance hall, ballroom; dance, ball
راقص rāqiṣ dancer; dance, dancing (used attributively) │راقصة حفلة (ḥafla) dance, ball; راقصة موسيقى dance music; ليلة راقصة (laila) dancing party
راقصة rāqiṣa pl. -āt female dancer; O kneecap, patella
مراقصة murāqiṣa (female) dancing partner
 رقط II to speckle, spot (ھ s.th.)
ارقط arqaṭ  speckled, spotted; leopard
رقع raqa‘a a (raq‘) to patch (ھ a garment); -- raqu‘a u (رقاعة raqā‘a) to be stupid II = raqa‘a
رقعة ruq‘a pl. رقع ruqa‘, رقاع riqā‘ patch; piece of cloth; piece of land, terrain or ground; area; lot, plot of land; ground (of a flag); chessboard; slip of paper, piece of paper; note, brief message; ticket; coupon; bond, security; a cursive style of calligraphy
رقيع raqī‘ stupid, silly, foolish; impudent, impartment, shameless; (pl. ارقعة arqi‘a) firmament
رقاعة raqā‘a stupidity, foolishness folly
marqa‘īya مرقعية and marqa‘a مرقعة
tatters, rags
ترقيع tarqī‘ patching │القرنية ترقيع t. al- qarnīya transplantation of the cornea (mid.)
مرقعات muraqqa‘āt fragments
رقم raqama u (raqm) to write (ھ s.th.); to point, provide with points (ھ a text); to brand (ھ a hone); to imprint (ھ a trace, a mark); to mark (ھ s.th.); to stripe (ھ a fabric); to number (ھ s.th.) II to point, provide with points (ھ a text); to stripe, streak (ھ s.th.); to rule (ھ s.th.); to number (ھ s.th.) 354
رقم raqm pl. ارقام arqām numeral; number, No. │الھندية األرقام (hindīya) the numerals of the Arabs; القياس رقم r. al- qiyās or قياسي رقم (qiyāsī) record (athlet.), قياسيا رقما سجل (sajjala) to set a record (athlet.)
رقيم raqīm inscription tablet; letter, message
مرقم mirqam pl. مراقم marāqim  drawing pencil, crayon; (painter’s) brush
ترقم tarqīm pointing; numbering, numeration
مرقم marqūm pl. مراقم marāqīm  striped blanket
رقوص II taraqwaṣa (syr.) to toss, fling o.s. about
رقى raqiya a (raqy, ruqīy) to ascend (الى or في s.th. or to s.th.); to climb, mount, scale (ھ s.th.); to rise (in rank), advance, he promoted; to date back, go hack (الى to a bygone era); به رقي to lead s.o. up; to further, promote, encourage s.th.; - raqa i (رقية ruqya) to use magic or incantations (ه on s.o., من against s.th.) II to cause to ascend; to promote (ه s.o.); to raise, further, promote, advance (ھ s.th.) V to ascend, rise, advance, progress VIII to ascend, rise; to ascend (ھ s.th.; also. e.g., العرش al-‘arša the throne), climb (ھ s.th., on s.th., also العربة al-‘araba into the carriage); to advance, he promoted (الى منصب ilā manṣib to an office); to rise, increase (الى to the number of); to advance, rise, show an upward trend, develop upward; to date hack. go hack (الى to a given time)
رقي ruqīy rise, progress, upward development; به الرقي promotion, encouragement, furtherance of s.th.
رقية ruqya pl. رقى ruqan spell, charm, magic; incantation
رقاء raqqā’ magician, sorcerer
ارقى arqā higher, superior; more advanced, more progressed
مرقاة marqāh pl. مراق marāqin stairs, staircase; O elevator, lift
ترقية tarqiya raising; -- (pl. -āt) promotion (in rank); elevation; promotion, furtherance, encouragement, advancement; extension, development, improvement
ترق taraqqin pl. taraqqiyāt ascension; ascent; advance, advancement; progress, rise, progressive development
ارتقاء irtiqā‘ climbing, mounting; ascension; ascent; progress, rise, progressive development │العرش ارتقاء irt. al-‘arš accession to the throne
راق rāqin ascending, rising; high, high- ranking; superior, high-grade, high-class, of high standard; educated. refined; advanced │الراقية الطبقة (ṭabaqa) the upper class
راق rāqin pl. رقاة ruqāh magician, sorcerer
 مرتق murtaqin high, superior, advanced (esp. intellectually)
مرتقى murtaqan ascent, rise
 رك rakka i (rakk, ركة rikka, ركاكة rakāka) to be weak, feeble; to be poor, meager, scanty; -- u (rakk): عنقه في الشيء رك (fī ‘unuqihī) to saddle s.o. with the responsibility for s.th., thrust s.th. upon s.o.
ركة rikka weakness feebleness
ركيك rakīk pl. ركاك rikāk, رككة rakaka weak, feeble; thin; colorless, pallid (e.g., style); scanty, meager, poor, pitiful
ركاك rukāk weak, feeble
ركاكة rakāka weakness, feebleness; lowliness; inadequacy, poorness; colorlessness, pallor (e.g., of style) 355
 ركة rukka distaff  │الركة طب ṭibb ar-r. (eg.) popular treatment of illnesses by means of charms and incantations, practiced by women
ركب rakiba a (ركوب rukūb) to ride (ھ an animal); to mount (ھ an animal); to go, travel (ھ in a carriage, in an automobile, on a train, on board a ship, etc.), ride (ھ in a vehicle, on a bicycle); to get, climb (ھ into a carriage, on a bicycle, etc.), board ( ھa train, an airplane, a ship, etc.); to pursue (ه s.o.), be after s.o. (ب with s.th.); to engage (ھ in), embark (ھ on); to commit, perpetrate (ھ a sin, a crime); to master (ھ s.th.) │ البحر ركب (baḥr) to travel by sea; الحياة ركبا (ḥayāh) to master life; الخطر ركب (kaṭar) to embark on a risky undertaking; الحربية خيوله ركب (kuyūlahū l-ḥarbīya) to get on one’s high horse; الريح ذنب ركب (danaba r-rīḥ) to speed along like the wind; رأسه ركب (ra’sahū) to act at one’s disoretion; to act rashly, follow a whim; السيارة ركب (sayyāra) to go by car, travel in an automobile; الشطط ركب (šaṭaṭ) to commit excesses, go too far; الطيارة ركب (ṭayyāra) to fly, go by plane; العنف متن ركب (matna
l-‘unf) to commit acts of violence; ركب الخطل مركب (markaba l-kaṭal) to make a foolish mistake, commit a folly; to embark on a reckless course, do irresponsible things; اإلخفاق مطية ركب (maṭīyata l-ikfāq) to back the wrong horse, be on the losing
side, fail; األھوال ركب (ahwāl) to defy the horrors; الھواء ركب (hawā’) to fly, travel by air; ھواه ركب (hawāhu) to follow one’s whim II to make (ه s.o.) ride; to put, place, fasten, mount (على ھ s.th. on); to fit, mount, insert, set (في ھ s.th. in. e.g., a precious stone in a ring); to build in (ھ a machine part); to assemble (ھ e.g., the parts of an apparatus); to set up (ھ a machine); to install (ھ s.th.; techn.), lay (ھ an electric line, and the like); to assemble, put together, fit together (ھ s.th.); to make, prepare (ھ s.th. out of several components or ingredients); to construct, build (ھ e.g., a technical apparatus) IV to make (ه s.o.) ride or mount │رأسه اركبه وھواه (ra’sahū wa-hawāhu) to let s.o. have his head, let s.o. do as he pleases V to be composed, be made up, consist (من of) VI to be superimposed one upon another VIII to commit, perpetrate (ھ a sin, a crime); to pursue, practice (ھ s.th. │ شططا ارتكب (šaṭaṭan) to overdo s.th., go too far
ركب rakb riders, horsemen, cavalcade; caravan; traveling party; retinue, escort; procession, troop (of people)
ركبة rukba pl. ركب rukab, -āt knee │ابو الركب abū r-rukab dengue, breakbone fever (med.)
ركاب rikāb pl. ركب rukub stirrup; (pl.
-āt, ركب rukub, ركائب rakā’ib ) riding
Camel, riding animal, mount │ركابه حل بأرضنا ḥalla rikābuhū bi-arḍinā he has arrived on our soil; ركابه في ھو he is his loyal follower, he doge his footsteps; سار ركابه في do.; to cling to s.o.’s heels, be blindly subservient to s.o.
ركوب rakūb mount, riding animal
ركوبة rakūba pl. ركائب rakā’ib  mount, female riding camel
ركوب rukūb (horseback, camelback, etc.) riding; traveling (in a vehicle, by sea, by air, etc.); mounting (of a bicycle, of a horse, etc.), boarding (of a train, of a ship, etc.) │البحر ركوب r. al-baḥr navigation; الھواء ركوب r. al-hawā’ flying, aviation
ركاب rakkāb one who rides frequently, (professional) horseman or rider, jockey
 ركبان rukbān retinue, escort │به سار ذكره الركبان (dikruhū) approx.: his fame has spread far and wide 356
مركب markab pl. مراكب marāk  ship, boat, vessel │بخاري مركب (bukārī) steamship, steamer; مركīحربي (ḥarbī) warship, man-of-war; دوري مركب (daurī) patrol boat; شراعي مركب (širā‘ī) sailing vessel, sailboat; لصيد مركب m. aṣ-ṣaid fishing smack, trawler; النقل مركب m. an- naql freighter, transport
مركبة markaba pl. -āt vehicle; carriage, cab
مراكبى marākibī pl. marākibīya
boatman; ferryman
تركيب tarkīb pl. -āt, تراكيب tarākīb  fitting in, insertion, setting; building in; fastening, mounting; assembling, assembly; final assembly; installation (e.g., of a telephone extension); composition; making, preparation (out of several components or ingredients); construction, building (techn.); structure; constitution, build, physique; -- (pl. تراكيب tarākīb ) phrase, idiom; construction (gram.)
تركيبي tarkībī constructive, constructional
ارتكاب irtikāb perpetration (of a sin or crime)
راكب rākib riding, on horseback, mounted; riding, traveling (in a vehicle); (pl. ركاب rukkāb, ركبان rukbān) rider, horseman; (pl. ركاب rukkāb) passenger, occupant (of a conveyance) │دراجة راكب r. darrāja cyclist
مركوب markūb pl. مراكيب marākīb  riding animal, mount; (eg., syr.) red- leather shoes │مركوب ابو abū m. (eg.) shoebill (Balaeniceps rex; zool.)
مركبات murakkabāt components, constituents, elements, ingredients (esp. chem.)
مركب murakkab mounted, fastened, fixed (على on); fitted, inserted, set (في in); built-in; assembled; made up, composed, consisting (من of); compound. composite; complex; bound, not free; -- (pl. -āt) composition; a compound (chem.); a
composite; a complex (psychol.); medication, medicament │ مركب ربح (ribḥ) compound interest; كيميائي مركب (kīmiyā’ī) chemical compound; نقص مركب m. naqṣ inferiority complex
مرتكب murtakib perpetrator (of a crime)
ركد rakada u (ركود rukūd) to be motionless, still, stagnant
ركود rukūd suspension, standstill, stagnation; sluggishness; stillness, tranquility
راكد rākid stagnant; sluggish
ركز rakaza u i (rakz) to plant or ram in the ground, set up (ھ s.th., e.g., a pole); to fix, embed firmly (ھ s.th.) II to plant or ram in the ground, set up, (ھ s.th., e.g., a pole); to position, emplace (ھ s.th.); to fix, embed firmly (ھ s.th.); to cause to take root, naturalize (ھ s.th.); to concentrate (ھ s.th., also one’s thoughts, في on) V to concentrate; تركز tarakkaz ready! (starter’s command; athlet.) VIII to be implanted; to settle permanently, stay (في at a place); to lean, support one’s weight (على or الى on); to he fastened, be mounted (على on); to be based, rest (على on); to concentrate (في on); to gravitate (في to)
ركز rikz sound, tone
ركزة rakza pause, rest, break
ركاز rikāz pl. اركزة arkiza, ركزان rikzān precious minerals, buried treasures of the earth
ركيزة rakīza pl. ركائز rakā’iz  treasure; support, brace, shore, stanchion; pillar, pier; post, pile; shoring
مركز markaz pl. مراكز marākiz  foothold; stand, station; place where s.o. is posted or stationed; post; (police, etc.) 357 station; office, branch office (com.); locality where s.th. takes place, scene, site, seat; position (mil.); headquarters; main office, central office; central exchange (telephone); center (of a circle and fig.); focus; markaz, an administrative district (subdivision of a mudīrīya, Eg.); position, situation, office, post; (social, financial, official, etc.) status, standing; power, position (of a country); situation │ اساسي مركز (asāsī) starting point, basis;
 البوليس مركز police station; حيوية مراكز (ḥayawīya) vital centers; اإلدارة مركز m. al- idāra main office, central office, headquarters; الداء مركز m. ad-dā’ the seat of the disease O اإلذاعة مركز m. al-idā‘a broadcasting station; رئيسي مركز main office, headquarters; الرياسة مركز m. ar- riyāsa central command post; رياسة مركز الجيش m. riyāsat al-jaiš Supreme Command of the Army (Eg.); رعاية مركز الطفل m. ri‘āyat aṭ-ṭifl health center for children (Eg.); الحديدية السكة مركز m. as- sikka al-ḥadīdīya railroad junction; مركز الشرطة m. aš-šurṭa police station; نيابي مركز (niyābī) parliamentary seat, mandate; O التوليد مركز power station
مركزي markazī central; district (used attributively); المركزي O centrifugal; decentralized (administration)
مركزية markazīya centralism; centrality, central position or situation; المركزية decentralization
تركيز tarkīz setting up; installation; implantation, establishment, naturalization; concentration │ جھاز التركيزjahāz at-t. stabilizer (tech.)
تراكز tarākuz concentricity
ارتكاز irtikāz support
مركز murakkaz concentrated, centralized; O condensed
متراكز mutarākiz concentric
ركس VIII to suffer a setback, be thrown back; to decline, degenerate, be degenerate; to become stunted, atrophy
ركض rakaḍa u (rakḍ) to race, rush, run; to run away; to gallop (intrans., said of a horse, and trans. ھ a horse) III to race (ه s.o.), run a race (ه with) VI to compete in a race; to run fast
ركاض rakkāḍ runner, racer
ركوض rakūḍ fast-running, swift
ركع raka‘a a (ركوع rukū‘) to bend the body, bow (esp. in prayer); to kneel down, drop to one’s knees II and IV to make (ه s.o.) kneel down
ركعة rak‘a pl. raka’āt a bending of the torso from an upright position, followed
by two prostrations (in Muslim prayer ritual)
راكع rāki‘ pl. ركع rukka‘ bowing to the ground
ركل rakala u (rakl) to kick (ه s.o., ھ s.th.)
ركلة rakla (n. vic.) kick
ركم fJ rakama u (rakm) to pile up, heap up, accumulate, amass (ھ s.th.) VI to accumulate, be heaped up; to pile up, gather (clouds) VIII = VI
ركم rakam pile, heap
ركام rukām pile, heap; lump; cumulus clouds
O مركم markam pl. مراكم marākim 
storage battery
تراكم tarākum accumulation
ركن rakana u (ركون rukūn) and rakina a to lean, support one’s weight (الى on); to quiet down, become or be calm, to trust ( الى in), rely (الى on); to be dependent, have to rely (الى on) │ الھدوء الى ركن to remain calm IV to trust (الى s.o.), rely (الى on), place one’s confidence (الى in); to resort ( الى to) │اليه يركن (yurkanu) 358 reliable, dependable. trustworthy VIII to lean, recline, support one's weight (الى or على on)
ركن rukn pl. اركان arkān support, prop; corner; nook; basis, basic element, first principle; pl. اركان staff (mil.); basic elements, chief elements │ الحرب اركان a. al-ḥarb general staff (mil.); الجيش اركان a. al-jaiš do.; الجيش اركان رئيس chief of general staff; األركان وثيق of strong build, sturdy
ركنى ruknī: ركنية ضربة (ḍarba) corner kick (soccer)
ركين rakīn firm, steady, confident, imperturbable; grave, calm, sedate
ركون rukūn reliance, confidence, trust مركن mirkan pl. مراكن marākin  washtub مراكنة murākana (tun.) betrothal,
engagement
اركان arkān reliance, confidence, trust
ركوة rakwa pl. rakawāt (syr.) small coffee pot of copper. having a long handle
 رم ramma u i (ramm, مرمة maramma) to repair, overhaul (ھ s.th.); -- i (ramm, رمة rimma) to decay; to rot II to decay; to rot V to be repaired, undergo repair
رم ramm repair
رم ramm: األسنان رم r. al-asnān caries (med.)
رمة rimma cadaver
برمته bi-rummatihī whole, complete, entire │ برمتھا سوريةall Syria
رميم ramīm decayed, rotten; رمائم
ramā’im  decaying bones
رمام rumām decayed, rotten
مرمة maramma pl. -āt repair; shipyard (Tun.)
ترميم tarmīm pl. -āt repair, overhauling, restoration
رمث ramal pl. ارماث armā~ log raft
رمح ramaḥa a (ramḥ) to pierce, transfix (with a lance; ه s.o.); to gallop (horse)
رمح rumḥ pl. رماح rimāḥ, ارماح armāḥ lance, pike; spear, javelin; pole │الرمح رمي ramy ar-r. javelin throwing (athlet.)
رماح rammāḥ pl. ة lancer; uhlan
الرامح السماك as-simāk ar-rāmiḥ Arcturus (astron.)
رمد ramida a (ramad) to have sore eyes; to be inflamed (eye) II to burn to ashes, incinerate (ھ s.th.) V to burn to ashes, become ashes
رمد ramad ophthalmia, inflammation of the eyes; eye disease │حبيبي رمد (ḥubaibī) trachoma, granular conjunctivitis; مستشفى الرمد muštašfā r-r. eye clinic
طبيب رمدي and ramadī رمدي
ophthalmologist, oculist رمد ramid sore-eyed ارمد armad  sore-eyed
رماد ramād pl. ارمدة armida ashes │ الرماد اربعاءarbi‘ā’ ar-r. or الرماد يوم yaum ar-r. or الرماد عيد ‘īd ar-r. Ash Wednesday (Chr.); الرماد في نفخ (lit.: to blow into cold ashes, i.e.) to engage in futile undertakings, set out on a wild-goose chase
رمادي ramādī ashen, ash-colored, ash- gray
ترميد tarmīd cremation, incineration
رمز ramaza u i (ramz) to make a sign, to wink, nod, motion; to point (الى to), indicate (الى s.th.); to symbolize, represent or express symbolically (الى s.th.); to designate (ب ل or الى s.th. with a distinguishing mark)
رمز ramz pl. رموز rūmūz sign, nod, wink, motion; hint; allusion, intimation; allegory; riddle; symbol. symbolic figure, emblem, character; secret sign, code sign 359
رمزي ramzī symbolic(al}; in code, in cipher
رمزيات ramzīyāt cipher, code
rawāmīz  روامز pl. rāmūz راموز
specimen, sample; O facsimile
رمس ramasa i u (rams) to bury (ه s.o.); to cover, efface, wipe out (ھ tracks) VIII الماء في ارتمس to be immersed in water
armās ارماس rumūs, رموس pl. rams رمس
grave, tomb
راموس rāmūs grave, tomb
رمش ramaša i u to take with the fingertips (ھ s.th.); to wink, blink
رمش ramaš inflammation of the eyelids, conjunctivitis
رمشة ramša blink, wink
رمش rimš pl. رموش rumūš eyelashes
رمص ramaṣ white secretion (of the eye)
رمض VIII to be consumed by grief and sorrow
رمض ramaḍ parchedness, scorchedness (esp. of the ground due to excessive heat)
رمضاء ramḍā’  sun-baked ground │ بالنار الرمضاء من استجار approx.: to jump out of the frying pan into the fire
رمضان ramaḍān  Ramadan, the ninth month of the Muslim calendar
رمق ramaqa u (ramq) to regard (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), glance, look (ه ھ، at) II to stare, gaze (ه ھ، at); to perform (ھ work) perfunctorily and negligently, botch (ھ a job); to keep (ه s.o.) barely alive V to wait (ھ for an opportunity, and the like)
 رمق ramaq pl. ارماق armāq (last) spark of life, breath of life │ رمقه سد sadda ramaqahū to keep s.o. or o.s. barely alive, eke out a living, manage to keep body and soul together; to provide s.o. with a bare existence; to allay s.o.’s hunger; آخر على رمق ‘alā ākiri ramaqin at the point of death; on the verge of exhaustion, on one’s last legs
مرموق marmūq regarded, looked at; noted, of note; remarkable, notable, significant, important; lofty, proud
رمك armak , f. رمكاء ramkā’   ashen, ash-gray
ارماك rimāk, رماك -āt, pl. ramak رمكة
armāk mare
رمل II to sprinkle with sand (ھ s.th., so as to blot it) IV to become a widower or a widow V = IV
رمل raml pl. رمال rimāl sand │الرمل علم ‘ilm ar-r. or الرمل ضرب ḍarb ar-r. geomancy (divination by means of figures or lines in the sand)
رملي ramlī sandy, sabulous; sand- (in compounds) │رملية ساعة sandglass, hourglass
رمل ramal name of a poetical meter
رمال rammāl geomancer
ارمل armal  pl. ارامل arāmil  widower
اراملة arāmil , ارامل pl. armala ارملة
arāmila widow
مرملة marmala sandbox
ترمل tarammul widow(er)hood
 رمان rummān (coll.; n. un. ة) pomegranate; رمانة knob, pommel; (pl. -āt), يدوية رمانة (yadawīya) hand grenade
 ارمن and ارمنى look up alphabetically
 رمى ramā i (ramy, رماية rimāya) to throw, cast (ب ھ، s.th.); to fling, hurl (ب ھ، s.th.); to toss away, throw down (ب ھ، s.th.); to throw aside, toss aside, discard, lay aside ( ب ھ، s.th.); to shoot, fire; to pelt, hit, bombard (ه ھ s.o. with) shoot, fire (ب ه at
s.o. with); to charge (ه ب s.o. with), accuse (ب ه s.o. of), blame) 360 reproach (ه ب s.o. for); to aim, drive, be aimed (الى at), have in view, purpose, intend (الى s.th.), be out for (الى); with بين to sow dissension among
or between │ نارى بطلق رماه (ṭalaq) he fired a shot at him; بالغيب رمى (gaib) to practice divination VI to pelt one another; to throw
o.s. to the ground, prostrate o.s., fall to the ground; to throw o.s., fling o.s. (على on); to plunge, rush, throw o.s. (في into s.th.); to be vast, extend far into the distance; to come, get (information, report, news; الى to s.o.) │قدميه على ترامى (qadamaihi) to throw o.s. at s.o.’s foot; ذراعيه بين ترامى (dirā‘aihī) to throw o.s. into s.o.’s arms; عھدھا به ترامى عاطفة (‘ahduhā) a fooling that he had known long, long ago, a fooling which lay far behind him; ان الينا ترامى we have received word that ... VIII to throw
o.s. (على on, e.g., on the bed, on or to the ground); to fling o.s., fall (على upon s.o.), throw o.s., plunge (في into s.th.); to have fallen down and lie prostrate; to lie, sprawl (على on) │األرض الى ارتمى to fall to the ground, tumble
رمي ramy (act or process of) throwing, flinging, shooting, etc. │ الحربة رمي r. al- ḥarba javelin throwing, القرص رمي r. al- qurṣ discus throwing (athlet.); رميا اعدام بالرصاص i‘dām ramyan bi-r-raṣāṣ execution before a firing squad
رمية ramya (n. vic.) throw, toss, fling; shot │رام غير من رمية رب rubba ramyatin min gairi rāmin many a shot is without a (skilled) marksman (proverbially, of unexpected or undeserved success)
رمية ramīya pl. رمايا ramāyā game animal (being shot at or already killed)
مرمى marman pl. مرام marāmin aim, end, purpose; goal (athlet.); range (of a gun); reach, extent │المرمى حارس goal- keeper; النظر مرمى m. an-naẓar range of vision, field of vision
ترام tarāmin vastness, expanse │ترامى األطراف vast expanse, vastness
رام rāmin pl. رماة rumāh throwing; thrower, hurler; marksman; rifleman (Syr., mil.) │الرامي Sagittarius (astron.); سھم الرامي sahm ar-r. Sagitta (astron.); رامي اللھيب flame thrower
│ extensive wide, mutarāmin مترام huge vast, مترامي األطراف
 رامية look up alphabetically
 رن ranna i (رنين ranīn) to cry, wail, lament; to resound; to echo; to ring
رنة ranna pl. -āt scream; sound; reverberation, echo
رنين ranīn lament, wailing; sound; reverberation, echo; resonance; ring
رنان rannān and مرنان mirnān ringing, resounding; resonant; reverberating, echoing
O رنانة rannāna tuning fork (mus.)
ارنب and ارنبة look up alphabetically
رنح II to make dizzy, make stagger, send reeling (ه s.o.); to sway (ھ s.th.) │ رنح اعطافه (a‘ṭāfahū) to work up s.o.’s feelings, send s.o. into a frenzy V to stagger, reel, totter, sway; to shake, rock │اعطافه ترنحت (a‘tāfuhū) to get into one’s stride, become ecstatic, be carried away; to be beside o.s.
مرنحة marnaḥa prow (of a ship)
رندح randaḥa to scan (verse)
رنق II to cloud, muddy (ھ water); to blur, dim (ھ the eyes; said of sleep); to halt, stop, stop over, stay; to look, glance (نحو toward or at s.th.) │ الى النظر رنق (naẓara) to keep looking at, stare at
رنق ranq turbid, clouded (water)
رونق raunaq glamor, splendor, beauty 361
رنم II and V to sing (ب a song); to intone (ب a song); to recite in a singsong voice, chant (ب s.th.)
ترنيمة tarnīma pl. ترانم tarānim  hymn, anthem; song; a kind of chanting recitation; little story recited in a singsong voice; little song
رنو) رنا) ranā u to gaze, look (الى at s.th.)
رنى II and IV to please delight (ه s.o.)
رھب rahaba a (rahab, ruhb, رھبة rahba) to he frightened, be afraid; to fear, dread (ه s.o.)
│ جانبه رھب see جانب II to frighten, scare, alarm, intimidate (ه s.o.) IV = II; to terrorize (ه s.o.) V to threaten (ه s.o.); to become a monk, enter monastic life (Chr.)
رھبة rahba fear, fright, alarm, terror; awe
رھبى rahbā, ruhbā fear
رھبوب rahbūb great fear, fright, terror
رھيب rahīb dreadful, awful, fearful, terrible; solemn, grave
ترھيب tarhīb intimidation
ارھاب irhāb intimidation, frightening; threatening; terror, terrorism (pol.); sabotage
ارھابي irhābī terrorist(ic); sabotage (used attributively); (pl. -ūn) terrorist
ترھب tarahhub monasticism, monastic life (Chr.)
راھب rāhib pl. رھبان ruhbān monk (Chr.)
راھبة rāhiba pl. -āt nun (Chr.)
مرھوب marhūb terrible, dreadful
رھبن II tarahbana to become a monk, enter monastic life (Chr.)
رھبنة rahbana and رھبانية rahbānīya monasticism; monastic order, congregation (Chr.)
رھج rahj, rahaj dust
رھط rahaṭa a to gobble, gulp greedily
رھط rahṭ, rahaṭ pl. ارھاط arhāṭ, ارھط arhuṭ, اراھط arāhiṭ , اراھيط arāhīṭ  group (of people), band, troop
رھط rahṭ pl. رھاط rihāṭ leather loin- cloth
رھف rahufa u (رھافة rahāfa) to be thin; to be sharp (sword); -- rahafa a (rahf) and IV to make thin (ھ s.th.); to make sharp, sharpen (ھ s.th., esp. fig.) │األذن ارھف (udn) to prick up one’s ears (لفالن so as to catch the words of s.o.), الى) ل السمع رھف) (sam‘) to listen closely to
رھف rahif thin
رھيف rahīf thin; slender, slim; sharpened, sharp
ارھاف irhāf sharpening
مرھف murhaf thin, fine; sharpened, sharp │ الحس مرھف m. al-ḥ. delicate, sensitive
رھق rahiqa a (rahaq) to come over s.o. or s.th. (ه ھ،), overtake (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) III to
 approach (ھ an age); to approach the age of sexual maturity; to be adolescent IV to bring down (ه ھ upon s.o. s.th.), make (ه s.o.) undergo or suffer (ھ s.th.); to oppress, burden, overburden (ه s.o., ب with s.th.), lie heavily, bear down (ه on s.o.) │جذبا ارھقه (jadban) to tug at s.o. violently or too violently
مراھقة murāhaqa puberty
ارھاق irhāq pressure, oppression; suppression; heavy load (e.g., of work)
مراھق murāhiq adolescent
مرھق murhiq oppressive (burden, heat)
رھل rahila a to be flabby, soft; to be bloated, fat (flesh, body) V do.
راھل rāhil flaccid, flabby, soft, 362 ترھل
tarahhul obesity, fatness
مترھل mutarahhil flaccid, flabby, soft; bloated, fat
رھمة rihma pl. رھم riham, رھام rihām drizzle, lasting fine rain
مرھم marham pl. مراھم marāhim  salve, ointment; cream, cold cream; pomade
رھن rahana a (rahn) to pawn, deposit as security (ھ s.th., عند or ه with s.o.); to mortgage (ھ real estate) III to bet, lay a wager (ه with s.o., على on, that ... ) IV to deposit in pledge, give as a security, pawn (ھ s.th.) VIII to receive or take in pledge, as a security (من ھ s.th. from s.o.); to pawn, deposit in pledge (ھ s.th.); to make (ھ s.th.) subject (ب to), make (ھ s.th.) conditional (ب on); pass.: urtuhina to be subject (ب to) │ب نفسه ارتھن (nafsahū) to pledge o.s. or dedicate o.s. to the cause of X to demand as a security (ھ ه from s.o. s.th.)
رھن rahn pawning, mortgaging, pledging; -- (pl. رھون ruhūn, رھونات ruhūnāt, رھان rihān) pawn, pledge; security (ب for s.th.); hostage; mortgage. hypothec; ب رھن depending on, conditional on, subject to; -- rahna (prep.) pending; depending on, conditional on; subject to, liable to │رھونات محل maḥall r. pawnshop; اشارته رھن rahna išāratihī at s.o.’s beck and call; سيطرته رھن r. saiṭaratihī under s.o.’s power or dominion; ذاك رھن ھذا this depends on that;
اھتمامه رھن المسألة al-mas’ala r. ihtimāmihī the problem is being given every attention by him; التحقيق رھن السجن اودع ūdi‘a s-sijna rahna t-taḥqīq he was taken into custody pending investigation
رھنية rahnīya mortgage (deed)
رھين rahīn pawned, mortgaged, pledged, given as security; held in pledge; security (ب for); responsible (ب for); subject (ب to); (prep.) subject to, depending on │ رھينه كان (rahīnahū) to be under obligation to s.o.; to be dependent on s.o.
رھينة rahīna pl. رھائن rahā’in  pawn, pledge, security; hostage; mortgage, hypothec
رھان rihān bet, wager; competition, contest
مراھنة murāhana pl. -āt bet, wager
راھن rāhin pledger, mortgagor; fixed, established, certain; lasting, permanent; current; present, actual │الراھنة الظروف present circumstances; الراھنة الحالة the present condition; the status quo
مرھون marhūn pawned, pledged, mortgaged, given as security; subject (ب to) │بأوقاتھا مرھونة األمور (bi-auqātihā) there is a time for everything
مرتھن murtahan mortgagee, pledgee; pawnbroker
 رھو) رھا) rahā u (rahw) to amble
رھو rahw quiet, calm, peaceful, tranquil; stillness, calm, peace, tranquility; (pl. رھاء rihā’) crane (zool.)
رھوان rahwān ambler (horse); pal-frey  الرھاء ar-ruhā’ the city of Urfa (Gr. Edessa) رھون rahwana and II tarahwana to amble
(horse)
رھو see رھوان
 روب) راب) rāba u (raub) to curdle (milk) II and IV to (cause to) curdle (ھ milk)
روب raub curdled milk, curds
رائب rā’ib curdled (milk)
 روب (Fr. robe) rōb pl. ارواب arwāb dressing gown
 بائع rōbabēkiyā: vecchia) roba (It. روبابيكا 363 dealer junk الروبابيكيا
روبصة raubaṣa sleepwalking, somnambulism
تروبص taraubuṣ sleepwalking, somnambulism
روبل rūbel ruble روبية rūbīya pl. -āt rupee روتانية rūtāniyā Ruthenia
روث) راث) rāta u (raut) to drop dung
روث raut (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. ارواث arwāt dung, dropping (of horse, camel, and the like)
 روج) راج) rāja u (رواج rawāj) to be spread, circulate, be current; to find a good market, sell well, be in demand (merchandise); to be or become brisk, pick up (market); to be at band, be available (ل for s.o.) II to spread (ھ rumors, news, etc.), circulate, put into circulation (ھ s.th.; currency, rumors, news, etc.); to push the sale (ھ of s.th.), open a market (ھ for an article); to sell, bring on the market (ھ an article); to promote, further (ل ھ، s.th.); to make propaganda (ل for), propagate (ل s.th.)
رواج rawāj circulation; marketability, salability; sales
اروج arwaj  more widespread, more common; better selling
ترويح tarwīj spreading, propagation, circulation; sale, distribution (of an article of commerce); promotion, furtherance
رائح rā’ij circulating, current; universal, widespread, common; salable, marketable, in demand, selling well (merchandise); brisk (business market)
 روج (Fr.) rūž rouge
روح) and راح (ريح rāḥa u (رواح rawāḥ) to go away, leave, go; (with foll. imperf.) to begin, set out to do II rawwaḥa to fan (air); to refresh, animate, revive (ھ the heart, the spirits); -- rayyaḥa to give (ه s.o.) rest, make (ه s.o.) relax, make (ه s.o.) comfortable, provide rest and recreation (ه for s.o.); to rest (ھ e.g., عينيه one’s eyes) │ نفسه عن روح to find recreation, relax, amuse o.s. III to go in the evening (ه to
s.o.); to alternate, vary (بين between two things) IV اروح arwaḥa to stink, smell bad; -- اراح arāḥa to give (ه s.o.) rest, let ( ھ s.th.) rest; to deliver, release (ه من s.o. from); to put (ه s.o.) at ease, soothe (ھ the heart, or the like); to relieve, free (ه s.o., من of), ease (ه من for s.o. s.th.); to do (ه s.o.) a good turn, gladden (ه ب s.o. with), make (ه s.o.) happy (ب by) │من نفسه اراح (nafsahū) to find recreation from, relax from V to fan o.s. (بالمروحة bi-l-mirwaḥa with the fan) VI to fluctuate, alternate, vary (بين between; esp. with two figures following); to intervene, lie (بين between two events) VIII to find rest (من from); to rest, relax, find recreation; to be satisfied, be pleased (الى with s.th.), agree, consent ( الى to s.th.); to like (ل or الى s.th.), be happy, be glad (ل or الى about s.th.) │ارتاح للمعروف to be happy to be of service, like doing favors X استروح to inhale air, breathe; to smell, sniff (ھ s.th.); to be refreshed (الى by or with s.th.); -- استراح to be calm; to become calm; to find rest; to take a rest, have a break; to be refreshed ( الى by or with s.th.); to rest, relax (من from); to be delivered, be saved (من from), be relieved (من of); to calm down, relax; to rely (الى on); to be happy, be glad (الى about), be pleased (الى with)
راح rāḥ wine
ريح rīḥ f. (occasionally m.) pl. رياح riyāḥ, ارواح arwāḥ, ارياح aryāḥ wind; fart; smell, odor │ رياح ابو abū r. weather vane; scarecrow; ريحه سكنت sakanat rīḥuhū to expire, become obsolete, fall into oblivion; ريحه ھبت habbat rīḥuhū 364 he was in clover, he was in luck’s way; ذھب الريح مع to go with the wind, vanish
ريح rayyiḥ windy
روح m. and f., pl. ارواح arwāḥ breath of life, soul; spirit (in all senses); gun barrel
│القدس روح r. al.quds (qudus), also الروح القدس the Holy Ghost; فيه روح ال (rūḥa) spiritless, insipid, inane; الروح خفيف likable, amiable, charming; الروح ثقيل dull, boring, unpleasant (person); الروح طويل long-suffering, patient; الروح على حرصا (ḥirṣan) dangerâ (on warning signs)
روحي rūḥī spirituous; spiritual; pl. -āt spiritual things │روحية حالة state (or frame)
 of mind; روحية مشروبات alcoholic beverages, spirits
روح rauḥ refreshment
روحة rauḥa pl. -āt journey or errand in the evening
راحة rāḥa rest, repose; recreation; ease, leisure; vacation; comfort; (pl. -āt, راح rāḥ) palm of the hand, hand │ بالراحة leisurely, gently, slowly, at one’s ease; بكل راحة unhurriedly, leisurely; easily, with ease; الراحة بيت bait ar-r. water closet, toilet; الراحة اسباب luxury; الراحة معدات mu‘iddāt ar-r. conveniences; الراحة فترة fatrat ar-r. pause, rest, break, recess; راحة الحلقوم r. al-ḥulqūm Turkish delight; راحة اليد r. al-yad palm of the hand; القدم راحة r. al-qadam sole of the foot
ريحة rīḥa smell, odor
روحية rūḥīya spirituality; mentality, mental attitude, frame of mind
رواح rawāḥ departure; going, leaving; return, return trip (as opposed to جيئة); rest, repose │ورواحه غدوه في (gudūwihī) (lit.: in his coming and going, i.e.) in everything he did
رياح rayyāḥ pl. -āt (eg.) large irrigation canal, main canal (in the Egyptian irrigation system)
اروح arwaḥ  more calming, more soothing
اريحي aryaḥī generous, liberal, openhanded
اريحية aryaḥīya generosity, liberality, munificence
ريحان raiḥān (coll.) sweet basil (Ocimum basilicum; bot.); (pl. رياحين rayāḥīn ) aromatic plants │الريحان قلم qalam ar-r. or الريحاني القلم (raiḥānī) a highly decorative style of Arabic calligraphy
روحاني rūḥānī spiritual, immaterial; divine, sacred, holy; (pl. -ūn) clergyman, minister (Chr.)
روحانية rūḥānīya spirituality; transfiguration
مراح marāḥ place visited in the evening; -- murāḥ, also marāḥ pasture; daytime pasture
مروحة mirwaḥa pl. مراوح marāwiḥ  fan; ventilator; O propeller │ الخوص المروحة (kūṣ) palm-leaf fan; الخيش مروحة m. al-kaiš punkah, a canvas-covered frame suspended from the ceiling for fanning a room
O مرواح mirwāḥ fan; ventilator (mor.) مرياح miryāḥ causing flatulence (food) ترويح tarwīḥ fanning; ventilation,
airing; refreshment; diversion, amusement (also النفس عن الترويح)
walk, nafs t. ترويحة نفس tarwīḥa: ترويحة stroll
التراويح صالة ṣalāt at-tarāwīḥ prayer performed during the nights of Ramadan
ترييح taryīḥ (eg.) installation; fitting in, insertion
ارتياح irtiyāḥ satisfaction, gratification; pleasure; joy, delight 365
استرواح istirwāḥ airing, ventilation; air intake; respiration │ صدري استرواح (ṣadrī) pneumothorax (med.)
استراحة istirāḥa rest, repose, relaxation, recreation; - (pl.- at) intermission, recess, pause, root, break; public resthouse (for travelers; Eg.)
رائح rā’iḥ: وغاد رائح (gādin) going back and forth, walking up and down
رائحة rā’iḥ pl. روائح rawā’iḥ  odor, smell; fragrance, perfume; pl. روائح perfumes; flavorings (e.g., those used in baking)
مريح murīḥ restful, reposeful; calming, soothing; cozy; comfortable; flatulent │ مريح كرسي (kursī) armchair; club chair, easy chair
مراح murāḥ see above under marāḥ
مرتاح murtāḥ resting, relaxing; relaxed, calm, serene; reassured, satisfied, content; pleased, delighted │البال مرتاح at ease, relaxed, serene, tranquil; الضمير مرتاح of peaceful mind, undisturbed by scruples
 مستريح mustarīḥ resting, relaxing; relaxed, calm, reassured
مستراح mustarāḥ water closet, toilet
 رود) راد) rāda u (raud) to walk about, move about, prowl; to look, search (ھ for s.th.) in to seek to win (ه على s.o. for s.th.), try to entice or tempt (على ه s.o. to do s.th.); to approach, accost (ه s.o.); to seek to alienate or lure away (عن ه s.o. from); to attempt to seduce (ھا a woman) │عن راوده نفسه to seek to tempt s.o. IV to want (ھ s.th., ان to do s.th.), wish. have a mind, be willing (ان to do s.th.); to want to have (ھ s.th.), desire, covet (ھ s.th.), strive (ھ for s.th.); to be headed. be bound (ھ for a place); to intend (ھ s.th., ان to do s.th.); to aim (الى or ھ من with s.th. at), purpose, have in view ( ھ من by s.o. s.th.); to drive ( الى at s.th., من with s.th.); to be out (الى or ھ for), be bent (الى or ھ on); to mean (ه s.o., ھ s.th., ب by); to have s.o. (ه) in mind
with s.th. (ب), aim at s.o. (ه) with s.th. (ب); to have (good or evil) designs (ھ) on s.o. ( ب), intend or plan to do s.th. (ھ) with s.o. ( ب); to be on the point (ھ or ان of doing s.th.), be about (ھ or ان to do s.th.); to urge, induce, prompt (على ه s.o. to do s.th.)
│ان به اراد by this he meant that ...; he understood it to mean that ...; خيرا به اراد (kairan) to wish s.o. well; ان على اراد to seek to induce s.o. to (do s.th.); العاصمة اراد on his way to the capital; الشيء على نفسه اراد (nafsahū) he tried to bring himself to do it VIII to repair, betake o.s. (ھ to a place); to explore (ھ s.th.)
رود raud exploration
ريادة riyāda exploration
رويدا ruwaidan slowly, gently, leisurely
│ رويدا رويداgradually, slowly, by and by;
رويدك ruwaidaka take it easy! slowly!
مرود mirwad pl. مراود marāwid  pencil, little stick (originally for applying kohl to the eyelids)
ارادة irāda will, volition; wish; desire; (pl. -āt) irade, decree (of a ruler); will power │(ḥasaba) at will
ارادي irādī intentional, willial, voluntary
ارتياد irtiyād visit (to a place); exploration
رائد rā’id pl. رواد ruwwād visitor; scout, reconnoiterer; boy scout; explorer; leader; major (mil.; U.A.R.); precept, guiding principle. rule (of conduct)
مريد murid pl. -ūn novice (of a Sufi order); aspirant; adherent, follower, disciple
مراد murād wanted, desired, intended; design, purpose, intention 366
رؤد see رود 
رودس rudūs Rhodes (chief island of the Dodecanese)
روديسيا rōdīsiya Rhodesia
روز) راز) rāza u (rauz) to weigh (ھ s.th.); to examine (ھ s.th.); to consider ھ s.th.)
روزنامة rūznāma almanac
 □ روس II (from رأس) to point, sharpen (ھ s.th.); to taper (ھ s.th.); to supply with a heading or title (ھ essay, book)
□ ترويسة tarwīsa head, heading, title, caption
  مراوس mirwās race track
مراويس marāwīs  race horses
 الروس ar-rūs the Russians
روسي rūsī Russian
الروسية ar-rūsīya the Russian language
روسيا البيضاء│ Russia rūsiyā روسيا
(baḍā’) Byelorussia
لحم روستو rostō, arrosto) (It. روستو
(laḥm) fried meat; rout
rawāšin  رواشن pl. raušan روشن
skylight, scuttle
روض) راض) rāḍa u (rauḍ, رياضة riyāḍa) to tame, domesticate (ھ an animal); to break in, train (ھ an animal); to train, coach (ه s.o.); to pacify, placate (ه s.o.) │ نفسه راض to practice (على s.th.), exercise o.s. (على in) II = I; to tame, regulate (ھ e.g., a river) III to seek to make tractable, try to bring round (ه s.o.) V to practice, exercise o.s.; -- تريض tarayyaḍa (denominative of رياضة) to
 (take a) walk, promenade; to do physical exercise, go in for sports VI to haggle, bargain (with one another, over a price) VIII to practice, exercise o.s.; to train o.s., school o.s. (ب on or by means of); to (take a) walk, promenade X to be or become glad, happy, cheerful
روضة rauḍa pl. روض rauḍ, -āt, رياض riyāḍ, ريضان rīdān garden; meadow │ األطفال روضة (pl. رياض) kindergarten, nursery school
الرياض ar-riyāḍ Riyadh (capital of Saudi Arabia)
رياضة riyāḍa pl. -āt practice, exercise; physical exercise, gymnastics; sport; walk, promenade; relaxation, rest; spiritual exercise; رياضات religious exercises, devotions (Chr.); mathematics │نفسه رياضة
r. nafshī walking, promenading; الرياضة البحتة (baḥta) pure mathematics; الرياضة التطبيقية (taṭbīqīya) applied mathematics; عقلية رياضة (‘aqlīya) exercise of wits, intellectual games
رياضي riyāḍī sportive, sports (adj.); (pl.
اخبار │ mathematic(al) sportsman; -ūn) (murāsil) مراسل رياضي news; sports رياضية sports األلعاب الرياضية reporter; sports
رياضات riyāḍīyāt mathematics
ترويض tarwīḍ sports
روع) راع) rā‘a u (rau‘) to frighten, scare, alarm (ه s.o.); to startle, surprise (ه s.o.); to awaken s.o.’s (ه) admiration, appeal (ه to s.o.), please, delight, thrill (ه s.o.) │ما مجيؤك اال راعني (illā majī’uka) your arrival has been a complete surprise to me II and IV to frighten, scare, alarm, awe (ه s.o.) V and VIII to be frightened, be alarmed (من at, by)
روع rau‘ fright, alarm, dismay, fear; -- rū‘ heart, mind, soul │روعك ھدئ (haddi’) and روعك سكن (sakkin) take it easy! relax! روعه في (ادخل) القى to persuade s.o., make
s.o. believe, talk s.o. into believing (ان that), inspire (ھ s.th.); بروعه خطر it occurred to him, it came to his mind
روع rawa‘ beauty 367
روعة rau‘a fright, alarm, fear; awe; astonishment, surprise; perplexity; charm, beauty, magnificence, splendor
اروع arwa‘  more wonderful, more marvelous; more charming, more delightful; more magnificent; more obvious, clearer
ارتياع irtiyā‘ alarm, dismay, shock
رائع splendid, admirable, wonderful, marvelous, glorious, magnificent; charming, delightful; awesome, imposing, impressive, thrilling; clear as daylight │في النھار رائعة fī r. in-nahār in broad daylight; شبابه رائعة في fī r. šabābihī in the prime of his years; الرائعة الحقيقة plain truth
رائعة rā’i‘a pl. روائع rawā’i‘ an imposing thing │الفن روائع r. al-fan masterpieces of art
مروع murawwi‘ terrible, dreadful, frightening
مروع murawwa‘ frightened, terrified, alarmed
مريع murī‘ dreadful, terrible, horrible
مرتاع mutā‘ frightened, terrified, alarmed
روغ) راغ) rāga u (raug, روغان rawagān) to turn off, swerve; to dodge, evade (من عن، s.o.), get out of the way of (من عن،); furtively to turn away; to go away (الى to), depart, leave (الى for) III to deal in an underhanded, fraudulent manner (ه with s.o.), double-cross (ه s.o.); to dodge, engage in low trickery, play fast and loose; to light with unfair means (ه s.o.)
رواغ rawāg dodge, shift, artifice, sly trick
رواغ rawwāg sly, wily, insidious, crafty
رويغة ruwaiga dodge, shift, artifice, sly trick
اروغ arwag  more cunning, more insidious
روغان rawagān turning off; swerving; dodging, evasion
مراوغة murāwaga sly, underhanded dealings; humbug, trickery; artifice, cunning; pl. -āt distortions, prevarications, lies; tricks, wiles
روق) راق) rāqa u (روق rauq) to be clear, be pore (liquid); to surpass, excel (على s.o., s.th.), prove superior (على to); to please,
 delight, (ه or ل s.o., also عينه في fī ‘ainihī s.o.), give s.o. pleasure, appeal to s.o. (ه، عينه في ل،) II to clarify, purify, filter (ھ a liquid) │دمعه روق (damahū) to refresh s.o. (drink); to pacify, placate s.o., cool s.o. off; البضاعة روق to make a clearance sale IV to pour out (ھ a liquid); to shed, spill ( ھ s.o.); to make (ھ a liquid) flow │ماء اراق وجھه (mā’a wajhihī) to eacri1ice one’s honor, lose all respect, lose face V to have breakfast
راق rāq pl. -āt layer, stratum
روق rauq pl. ارواق arwāq portico; horn
روقة rauqa beautiful, pretty, handsome (of persons; for both gender, sing. and pl.)
رواق riwāq, ruwāq pl. اروقة arwiqa tent; curtain, screen; flap of the tent for protection against the wind (used by Syrian Bedouins); sun roof of mate over a bazaar (syr.); portico; open gallery, colonnade, loggia; porch, veranda (syr.); pavilion of an exposition; living quarters, dormitories and workrooms of the students of Al Azhar University in Cairo, divided according to provinces and nationalities │رواقه ضرب to pitch one’s tent, take up quarters, settle down
رواقي riwāqī stoic(al); (pl. -ūn) a stoic; friar; الرواقية ar-riwāqīya Stoicism 368
راووق rāwūq filter
ترويق tarwīq filtration, clarification, purification
ترويقة tarwīqa (syr.) breakfast
اراقة irāqa pouring out; shedding, spilling │الدم اراقة bloodshed
رائق rā’iq clear, pure
الروك مال māl ar-rōk (eg.) public property, community property
 رول II to slaver, slobber, drool
روال ruwāl slaver, slobber
  رول(Fr. rôle) rōl role
  روم) رام) rāma u (raum, مرام marām) to desire, wish, want, covet (ھ s.th.), crave ( ھ for); to wish (ھ ل s.o. s.th.); to look (ھ for) │يرام ما على (yurāmu) as well as one could possibly wish, in excellent order
رام rāmallāh Ramallah (town in W Jordan, N of Jerusalem)
روم raum wish, desire
مرام marām pl. -āt wish, desire, craving, longing; aspiration
  الرومar-rūm the Romaeans, the Byzantines; Byzantium; pl. األروام al- arwām (the adherents of) the Greek Orthodox Church │ الروم بحرbaḥr ar-r. the Mediterranean
رومي rūmī pl. اروام arwām Romaean, Byzantine; Greek Orthodox (Church) │ رومي ديك (dīk) turkey (eg.); رومي جبنة (gibna) a brand of cheese (eg.)
Rome rōma رومة and rōmā روما
رومية rūmiya Rome
الرومان ar-rumān the Romano; the Romanic peoples
روماني rūmānī Roman; Romanian;
Romanic
Romania rūmāniyā رومانيا rheumatism rūmātism (Engl.) روماتزم rhubarb rāwad راوند riwand, روند رنق see رونق
  روىrawiya a (ري ray, riyy) to drink one’s fill, quench one’s thirst; to be irrigated; -- rawā i to bring (على or ل s.o.) water, give ( ه s.o.) to drink; -- rawā i (رواية riwāya) to tell, relate (ل ھ s.th. to s.o.), report (ھ s.th.), give an account of (ھ); to pass on, transmit (عن ھ s.th. on the strength of an authoritative source), quote (عن from a source) II to quench s.o.’s (ه) thirst; to water, irrigate (ھ s.th.) IV to give (ه s.o.) to drink, quench s.o.’s (ه) thirst; to water ( ھ flowers, etc.); to moisten. wet (ھ s.th.) V to draw, obtain (ھ عن s.th. from); to ponder (عن ھ s.th.), reflect (في on) VIII to quench one’s thirst; to be supplied with water for drink, be given to drink; to be watered, be irrigated; to draw (on a source, i.e., to obtain information from it)
ري riyy quenching (of thirst); -- riyy, rayy watering, irrigation; moistening, wetting
ريا rayyan aroma, fragrance
 روي rawīy thirst-quenching
روي rawīy final letter, rhyming letter (in Arabic verse); rhyme │ واحد روي ذو monotonous (song)
رواء rawā’ fresh (water)
رواء ruwā’ prettiness, comeliness pleasing appearance
روية rawīya deliberation, reflection, consideration │ روية عنdeliberately, on purpose, روية غير عن offhand, casually
رواية riwāya pl. -āt tale, narrative; report, account; story; novel; play, drama; motion picture, film │ رواية محزنة(muḥzina) tragedy; مسرحية رواية (masraḥīya) play, stage play; سينمائية رواية motion 369 picture, film; مضحكة رواية (muḍḥika) comedy; غنائية رواية (ginā’īya) opera; قصصية رواية (qiṣaṣīya, qaṣaṣīya) novel; تمثيلية رواية (tamtīlīya) play, drama; ناطقة رواية sound film; ھزلية رواية (hazlīya) comedy
روائي riwā’ī novelist; dramatist, playwright; author, writer
ريان rayyān , f. ريا rayyā, pl. رواء riwā’ sated with drink; well-watered, well- irrigated; luxuriant, lush, verdant; full, plump (face); succulent, juicy, fresh, pretty; see also alphabetically
تروية tarwiya deliberation, reflection, consideration
اروائي irwā’ī irrigational; irrigated
ترو tarawwin deliberation, reflection, consideration
راو rāwin pl. rāwiyūn, رواة ruwāh and راوية rāwiya pl. روايا rawāyā transmitter (esp. of ancient Arabic poetry); relater; narrator, storyteller
مرويات marwīyāt tales, stories, reports
راى see راية 
رأي see رؤيا 
روى see ري، ريان، ريا 
 □ رية riyya = رئة ri’a (see رء)
رأى see رياء 
﷼ riyāl pl. -āt riyal, a silver coin: in Eg. = 20 qirš šāg (piasters); in Ir. = 200 fals; ﷼ تريزا ماريا Maria Theresa dollar
ريان Riyan (town and airport in S Hadhramaut, on Gulf of Aden)
ريب) راب) rāba i (raib) to disquiet, alarm, fill with suspicion or misgivings (ه s.o., ھ about s.th.); to give pause (.ه to s.o.), make (ه s.o.) 8top and think (ان that), make (ه s.o.) uneasy; to cast a suspicion (ه on s.o.), show (ه s.o.) in a suspicious light; to doubt, question, suspect (ه s.th.) IV to disquiet, alarm, startle, fill with suspicion or misgivings (ه s.o.) V to have doubts or misgivings (في ب، about), be suspicious (ب or في of) VIII to be suspicious, smell a rat; to suspect, doubt, question (ب or في s.o., s.th.), have doubts or misgivings (ب or في about), wavervdoubtfully (بين between) X to be invdoubt, be skeptical (في about), be suspicious,vhave misgivings, entertain doubts
ريب raib doubt; suspicion; uncertainty
│ ريب بال(bilā) no doubt, undoubtedly, doubtless; فيه ريب ال (raib) there is no doubt about it; المنون ريب r. al-manūn unpredictable turn of fortune, threatening fate; misfortune
ريبة rība pl. ريب riyab doubt, suspicion, misgiving
ارتياب irtiyāb doubt, suspicion, distrust, misgiving
مريب murīb arousing suspicion, suspicious
مرتاب murtāb doubting, doubtful, skeptical; doubter, skeptic; (به or مرتاب (فيه doubted, questionable, doubtful; suspect, suspicious │ امره في مرتاب (amrihī) suspicious, suspect, under suspicion
مستريب mustarīb doubtful, in doubt (في about); suspicious
فيه) مستراب) mustarāb (fīhi) suspect, suspicious
ريث) راث) rāta i (rait) to hesitate, delay, tarry V to hesitate, tarry, be tardy; to give (ب or في s.th.) long and thorough consideration; to stop; to stay, linger (في at a place); to be patient, bide one’s time, temporize, wait
 ريثما raitamā (conj.) as long as, while; when; until
see ريح, ريحة, رياح, ريحان, اريح, اريحية, ارياح, مرياح
روح ٠٧٣
ريخ (G.) raik Reich
□ ريس rayyis (=رئيس ra’īs) mate (Eg. Naval rank) │ ممتاز ريس (mumtāz) a naval rank (approx.: petty officer 3  class; Eg. 1939)
رأس see ri’āsa) رئاسة (= riyāsa رياسة □ presidential riyāsī رياسي
ريش) راش) rāša i (raiš) to provide with feathers, feather (ھ s.th.); to feather one’s nest, become wealthy II to provide with feathers, feather (ھ s.th.); to fledge, grow feathers (bird) V to fledge (bird); to become wealthy
ريش rīš (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. رياش riyāš, ارياش aryāš feathers; feathering, plumage; clothes, attire, exterior; bristles (e.g., of a brush)
ريشة rīša (n. un.) pl. -āt feather; quill; writing pen (also الكتابة ريشة); brush (of a painter); plectrum; lancet; (eg.) reed (of certain wind instruments, e.g., of the oboe; mus.) │الريشة وزن wazn ar-r. featherweight (athlet.)
ريشي rīšī feather (adj.), feathery, feathered, plumed, pinnate
رياش riyāš household effects; furniture; equipment
روض see تريض، رياض، رياضة، رياضي، رياضيات riyā‘, رياع ruyū‘, ريوع (rai‘, i rā‘a )راع )ريع
ريعان raya‘ān to increase, grow, flourish, thrive II to increase, augment (ھ s.th.)
ريع rai‘ pl. ريوع ruyū‘ yield; returns, proceeds, income (accruing from an estate), interest; profit share royalty; prime, choicest part │ الشباب ريع r. aš- šabāb the prime of youth
ريعان rai‘ān prime, choicest part │في الشباب ريعان fī r. iš-šabāb in the prime of youth; النھار ريعان في fī r. in-nahār in broad daylight
مريعة ارض arḍ marī‘a productive land
□ تاريع tārī‘ (eg.) cadastre; (also مساحة الريع) land survey
in-nahār r. fī في رائعة النھار rā’i‘a: رائعة
in broad daylight (see also روع)
ريف rīf pl. ارياف aryāf fertile, cultivated land; country (as opposed to city), countryside, rural الريف or مصر ريف Lower Egypt; seashore. seacoast; Er Rif (hilly coastal region of NE Morocco)
ريفي rīfī rural, rustic, peasant (adj.), country (used attributively); peasant, farmer; provincial, yokel, bumpkin; inhabitant of Er Rif (in Morocco)
ريق) راق) rāqa i (ريق raiq) to shine, glisten, glow, burn; to flow out, pour forth IV to pour out, shed, splll (see also روق)
ريق rīq and ريقة rīqa pl. ارياق aryāq saliva, spittle │ الريق على before break-fast, on an empty stomach; ريقه بلع and ابتلع (rīqahū) (lit.: to swallow one’s saliva, i.e.) to catch one’s breath, rest a while, take a short break; to hold back, restrain o.s. (of
s.o. in a rage); ريقه بلعه (balla‘ahū rīqahū) to allow s.o. a break, let s.o. catch his breath; الريق اجرى (ajā) to make the saliva flow, i.e., to make the mouth water, stimulate the appetite; ريق له اليجف (yajiffu) be is untiring (in speaking), he talks incessantly
ريق rayyiq: الشباب ريق في r. iš-šabāb in the full bloom of youth
 ريل) رال) rāla i and II to slobber, slaver, drool
مريلة maryala (string) apron
مريول maryūl bib
 ﷼ look up alphabetically
 ريم) رام) rāma i (raim) to go away, move, budge; to leave (ھ a place) │مكانه رام ما ١٧٣ (makānahū) not to budge, not to move from the spot II to stay, remain ( بالمكان at the place); (eg.) to bluff (على s.o.)
ريم rīm (eg.) froth, foam
ترييم taryīm (eg.) swaggering, bluffing, swindle
  ريمrīm (= رئم) addax, white antelope
  رين) ران)rāna i to take possession (على or ھ of s.th.), seize, overcome (ب على، or ه s.o., said of passion); to descend or come upon s.th. (على); to reign, prevail (على in, e.g., silence in a room)
 روي see ريا f. ,ريان 
 ريان look up alphabetically



ز

زاء zā’ name of the letter ز
زاؤوق zā’ūq quicksilver, mercury زئبق zi’baq quicksilver, mercury زاج zāj vitriol
زاجورا zāgōra Zagora, a brand of Egyptian cotton
زأر za’ara a (za’r, زئير za’īr) to roar, bellow
زئير za’īr roaring, roar, bellowing
زأط za’aṭ a (زئاط zi’āṭ) to clamor, be vociferous
crow zīgān زيغان pl. zāg زاغ
زؤام موت maut zu‘āam a sudden or violent death
 زؤان zu’ān darnel (Lolium temulentum; bot.)
 زان (syr., eg.) beech │زان ثمر tamar z.
beechnuts
زانة zāna pl. -āt spear; pole │(القفز) الوثب بالزانة al-watb (al-qafz) bi-z-z. pole vaulting (athlet.)
زاووق zāwūq quicksilver, mercury
زاي zāy name of the letter ز زب zubb pl. ازباب azbāb penis
زبيب zabīb (coll.; n. un. ة) dried grapes, raisins; (eg.) a strong colorless liquor made of raisins, milky white when diluted with water
ازب azabb , f. زباء zabbā’ , pl. زب zubb
hairy, hirsute, shaggy
زبد zabada a to chum (ھ milk) II to foam, froth, cream (milk) IV to froth, become foamy, foam (also, with rage)
زبد zabad pl. ازباد azbād foam, froth; dross │ البحر زبد z. al-baḥr meerschaum
زبدة zubda (fresh) butter (as opposed to سمن samn); cream; -- (pl. زبد zubad) choicest part, prime, cream, flower, elite;
extract, quintessence; essence, substance; gist, main point
زبدية zabdīya pl. زبادي zabādīy bowl
az- sinnūr سنور الزباد │ civet zabād زباد
z. civet cat
زبادي zabādī and زبادي لبن (laban) curdled milk (eg.)
مزابد pl. mizbada مزبدة mizbad, مزبد
mazābid  churn
زبر zabara u i to scold (ه s.o.)
زبر zubr penis
زبرة zubra pl. زبر zubar piece of iron
زبور zabūr (Book of) Psalms, Psalter
زبرج zibrij ornament, ornamentation, decoration, embellishment
زبرجد zabarjad chrysolite (min.)
زبط zabaṭa i (zabṭ) to quack (duck)
زبط zabaṭ (eg.) mud, mire
زباطة zubāṭa (eg.) bunch of dates
زوبعة zauba‘a pl. زوابع zawābi‘  storm, hurricane
زبق zabaqa u i (zabq) to tear out, pluck out (ھ hair) VII to slip in
زبل II to dung, manure
زبل zibl, زبلة zibla dung, manure
زبال zabbāl street sweeper; garbage collector
زبالة zubāla refuse, rubbish, garbage, sweepings
مزابل pl. mazbula mazbala, مزبلة
mazābil  dunghill; garbage can
زبون zabūn kicking (camel); hot, fierce, cruel (battle); stupid, foolish; fool; -- (pl. زبائن zabā’in ) customer, client, buyer; guest (of a hotel, end the like) │ دائم زبون patron, regular customer
زبون zubūn undergarment (nejd, ir.)
زبانة zibāna clientele, patronage, custom
زبانى zubānā pedipalpus or claw of a scorpion, of a crayfish (usually dual: زبانيا العقرب)
 زبانية zabāniya myrmidons; engels who thrust the damned into Hell
زبية zubya pl. زبى zuban elevated place above the waterline │الزبى السيل بلغ balaga s-sailu z-zubā the matter reached a climax, things came to a head
زت zatta (syr.) to throw
زج zajja (1  pers. perf. zajajtu) u (zajj) to throw, hurl (ھ s.th.); to push, shove, urge, drive (ب or ه ھ، s.o. or s.th.); to press, squeeze, force, cram (ب or ه ھ، s.o. or s.th., في into) │السجن في به زج (zujja, sijn) he was thrown into prison II to pencil ( الحاجبين al-ḥājibain the eyebrows); to glaze, coat with glass (ھ s.th.); to enamel ( ھ s.th.)
زج zujj pl. زجاج zijāj ferrule; arrowhead; spearhead
ازج azajj , f. زجاء zajjā’, pl. زج zujj
having beautifully arched eyebrows
زجاج zujāj glass (as substance)
زجاجة zujāja (u. un.) pl. -āt piece of glass; (glass) bottle, flask; (drinking) glass, tumbler
زجاجي zujājī glass (adj.), glassy, vitreous
زجاج zajjāj glazier
مزجج muzajjaj glazed, enameled;
ware enameled مصنوعات مزججة and مزججات
زجر zajara u (zajr) to drive back, drive away; to hold back, restrain, prevent (ه عن s.o. from); to rebuke, scold, upbraid (ه s.o.)
VII and VIII ازدجر izdajara pass. of I
زجر zajr forcible prevention; suppression (of customs, abuses, crimes); rebuke, reprimand
زجري zajrī reformatory, penitentiary (adj.) │زجري معھد (ma‘had) reformatory, reform school
مزجر mazjar: الكلب مزجر منه قعد qa‘ada minhu mazjara l-kalb to sit at a fitting distance from s.o.
زاجر zājir handicap, impediment, obstacle
زاجرة zājira pl. زواجر zawājir  check, curb; restriction, limitation
زجل zajala u (zajl) to let go, release (ھ a carrier pigeon) 373
زجل zajal pl. ازجال azjāl popular Arabic poem in strophic form; soft humming sound produced by the jinn at night
زجال zajjāl reciter of azjal (see above)
الزاجل حمام ḥamām az-zājil carrier pigeon, homing pigeon
يزجو) زجا) zajā u to drive, urge on (ھ ه، s.th., s.o.); to squeeze, press, force, cram (ھ ه، s.th., s.o., في into) II to shove, push (ھ s.th., ه s.o.); to drive, urge on (ھ s.th., ه s.o.); to jostle, crowd, cram, jam (ھ ه، s.th., s.o., الى into); to take or bring (forcibly) (ه الى، ھ s.o., s.th. into); to make (ھ time) pass; to pass, spend (ھ time) IV to shove, push (ھ s.th., ه s.o.); to drive, urge on (ھ s.th., ه s.o.); to jostle, crowd, cram, jam (ھ ه، s.th., s.o., الى into); to take or bring (forcibly) (ه ھ، الى s.o., s.th. into); to make pass, while away (ھ time); to extend (ل ھ s.th. to s.o.; greetings, compliments, thanks); to bestow (ل ھ s.th. on s.o.; e.g., praise) │ان الذھن الى ازجى (dihn) to suggest (the idea or assumption) that ...
مزجى muzjan little, scanty, paltry, trivial, insignificant
زحر zaḥara a i (زحير zaḥīr, زحار zuḥār) to groan, moan
زحير zaḥīr, groan, moan(s)
زحار zuḥār, groan, moan(s); dysentery (med.)
زحزح zaḥzaḥa (زحزحة zaḥzaḥa) to move (ھ s.th., from its place); to tear, rip (عن ھ s.th. off) II tazaḥzaḥa to budge, move(عن away from)
زحف zaḥafa a (zaḥf) to crawl, creep on the ground; to crawl about; to advance (army); to march, be on the march (على against or toward)
زحف zaḥf advance, march (of an army); (pl. زحوف zuḥūf) soldiery, army
زحف creeping, crawling
زحافة zaḥḥāfa pl. -āt reptile; implement for leveling the ground, leveler; ski
 زاحف zāḥif creeping, crawling; pl.
زواحف zawāḥif  reptiles
زحل zaḥala a (zaḥl, زحول zuḥūl) to move away, withdraw, retire (عن from a place) II to remove (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) V = I
زحل zuḥal  the planet Saturn
زحلقة zaḥlaqa to roll, slide (ھ s.th.) II
tazaḥlaqa to glide, slide, slip, skid
az-z. maidān ميدان الزحلقة zaḥlaqa: زحلقة
skating rink
تزحلق tazaḥluq skating; sikiing
زحالوي zaḥlāwī from Zaḥle (Lebanon), made in Zaḥle (e.g., arrack)
زحم zaḥama a (zaḥm) to push, shove, hustle, jostle, crowd, press, beset (ه s.o.) III to push, shove, hustle, jostle, crowd, press, beset (ه s.o.); to compete, vie (ه with s.o.) VI to press together, crowd together, mill .bout; to be closely packed lei in); to compete with one another VIII ازدحم
izdaḥama to be crowded, teem, swarm (ب with); to jostle, crowd together, mill about (e.g., people)
زحمة zaḥma crush, jam; crowd, throng زحام ziḥām crush, jam; crowd, throng مزاحمة muzāḥama pl. -āt competition;
rivalry │المزاحمة يقبل ال (yaqbalu) unrivaled, matchless without competition
تزاحم tazāḥum (mutual) competition
ازدحام izdiḥām crowd, crush, jam; over- crowdedness
مزاحم muzāḥim pl. -ūn competitor; rival
مزاحمة muzāḥima (female) rival
مزدحم muzdaḥim overcrowded, packed, jammed; teeming, swarming, crowded, crammed (ب with); -- muzdaḥam crowd, crush, jam 374
زخة zakka pl. -āt downpour, heavy shower
زخر zakara a (zakr, زخور zukūr) to swell, rise (e.g., river); to be overfull, brimful (ب of); to boast (ب of s.th.), vaunt (ب s.th.) V to swell; to rise; to abound (ب in), be full (ب of)
زاخر zākir and زخار zakkār full, brimful, filled to overflowing; abounding
in water (seas); excessive, profuse; exuberant (feeling)
زخرف zakrafa to adorn, embellish, decorate, ornament (ھ s.th.) II tazakrafa to adorn o.s.; to be embellished, ornamented
زخرف zukruf pl. زخارف zakārif decoration, ornament, embellishment; makeup, getup (e.g., of a book); vain, trifling finery │ لفظية زخارف (lafẓīya) flowers of speech, rhetorical flourishes; الدنيا زخارف z. ad-dunyā the vanities of this world
زخرفة zakrafa pl. -āt decoration (also stage decoration); ornamentation
زخرفي zukrufī ornamental, decorative
مزخرف muzakrif interior decorator; -- muzakraf embellished, ornamented │الخط المزخرف الكوفي (al-kaṭṭ al-kūfī) floriated Kufic writing
زخم zakama a (zakm) to throat back (ه s.o.); --
zakima a (zakam) to stink زخم zakim stinking ازخم azkam  stinking زخمة zakma plectrum زخمة zakama stench
زر zarra u to button, button up (ھ s.th.); to screw, contort (عينه ‘ainahū one’s eye) II to button, button up (ھ s.th.)
زر zirr pl. ازرار azrār, زرور zurūr button; push button; knob, pommel; bud (of a plant); tassel (of the tarboosh, etc.)
زرب zariba a to flow (water) II to pen, corral (
ھ livestock)
زربية zurbīya, zirbīya pl. زرابى zarābīy
carpet, rug
زريبة zarība pl. زرائب zarā’ib  zareba, cattle pen, corral, stockade, fold; (cattle) barn; (North Af.) hut made of branches
زاروب zārūb pl. زوارب zawārib  a long, narrow lane
spout mazārīb  مزاريب pl. mizrāb مزراب
زربون and zarābīl  زرابيل pl. zarbūl زربول
zarbūn pl. زرابين zarābīn a kind of shoe
زرد zarada u (zard) to choke (ه s.o.). strangle (
ھ s.o.’s neck); to gulp, swallow, devour (
 ھ s.th.) VIII ازدرد izdarada to swallow (ھ s.th.)
زردة zarda sweet dish made of rice and honey
زرد zard pl. زرود zarūd chain mail, coat of mail │الزرد حمار zebra
زردة zarada chain link
زردية zardīya pliers
مزرد mazrad throat, gullet
زرزر zarzara to chirp
زرازير pl. zurzūr زرزور and zurzur زرزر
zarāzīr  starling (zool.)
زرزوري zurzūrī gray with white spots (horse)
زرع zara‘a a (zar‘) to sow (ھ s.th.); to spread, scatter (ھ s.th.); to plant, raise, grow (ھ plants); to till, cultivate (األرض al-arḍa land); to lay (لغما lugman mine) VII pass. of I; VIII ازدرع izdara‘a to sow
زرع sowing; (pl. زروع zurū‘) seed; young standing crop, green crop; plantation; field(s) │ والضرع الزرع (ḍar‘) agriculture and stock farming
زراعة zirā‘a agriculture; tilling, tillage; cultivation (of land); growing, raising (of crops); farming │ البساتين زراعة horticulture 375
زراعي zirā‘ī agricultural, agrarian, farm- (in compounds) │زراعية ارض (arḍ) arable land; زراعي طريق field path, dirt road
زريعة zarī‘a that whicb is sown or planted; crop
زراع zarrā‘ pl. ة, -ūn peasant, farmer; planter
مزرع mazra‘ (arable) land
مزرعة mazra‘a pl. مزارع mazāri‘ field under cultivation; farm; plantation; country estate
مزرعاني mazra‘ānī farmer
مزارعة muzāra‘a temporary sharecropping contract (īsl. Law)
زارع zāri‘ pl. زراع zurrā‘ seedsman, sower; peasant; farmer; planter
مزروع mazrū‘ cultivated, planted
مزروعة mazrū‘a pl. -āt young standing crop, green crop
مزارع muzāri‘ pl. -ūn peasant, farmer; agronomist
(of cluster group, body, -āt pl. zarāfa زرافة واحد see زرافات ووحدانا│ people)
زرافة zarāfa, zurāfa pl. زرافى zarāfā, zurāfā, زرائف zarā’if  giraffe
 زرق zaraqa u i (= ذرق) to drop excrement (bird); -- zaraqa u (zarq) to hit, pierce (ه ب
s.o. with); to jab, bore (ه ھ، into s.o. or s.th.); to throw, hurl (ھ s.th.)
زرق zarq: اإلبر زرق z. al-ibar injections, injectings
مزراق mizrāq pl. مزاريق mazāriq  javelin
 زرق zariqa a (zaraq) and IX to be blue
زرق zaraq blue, blueness, blue color; O glaucoma (med.)
زرقة zurqa blue, blueness, blue color; O cyanosis
ازرق azraq , f. زرقاء zarqā’ , pl. زرق zurq blue; dark-colored; الزرقاء the blue sky, the blue
ازرقاق izriqāq blueness, blue │داء االزرقاق dā’ al-izriqāq cyanosis
 زورق look up alphabetically
زرقون zarqūn a bright red
زركش zarkaša to embellish with brocade embroidery; to adorn, embellish, decorate, ornament (ھ s.th.)
زركش zarkaš brocade, gold and silver embroidery
مزركش muzarkaš embellished with brocade embroidery, brocaded; embroidered (ب with silver and gold thread); embroidered; embellished, decorated, ornamented │ المزركش القلم (qalam) ornamental writing
زرنيخ zirnīk, zarnik arsenic
زرى zarā i (زراية zirāya) to rebuke, scold, upbraid (على s.o.), find fault (على ھ with
s.o. because of s.th.); to revile, disparage ( ب or J- s.0.), detract (ب or على from) IV to derogate, detract (ب from s.o. or s.th.), belittle, ridicule (ب s.o. or s.th.) V = I;
 VIII ازدرى izdarā to slight (ب or ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), make light, think little (ب or ه ھ، of), defy (ب or ھ e.g., danger) X = VIII
زرى zarīy bad, poor, miserable, despicable, contemptible
زراية zirāya contempt, disdain; revilement, disparagement
ازراء izrā’ contempt, disregard
ازدراء izdirā’ contempt, disdain, scorn
مزرى muzran despicable, contemptible زعبر za‘bara to deceive, cheat (على s.o.) زعبوط za‘abūṭ pl. زعابيط za‘ābīṭ  a woolen
fabric; woolen garment with a low neckline, worn esp. by the fellahin (eg.) 376
سعتر = za‘tar زعتر
زعج za‘aja a and IV to disturb (ه s.o.); to trouble, inconvenience, molest, pester, harass (ه s.o.); to disquiet, alarm make uneasy, upset (. s.o.); to stir up (ه s.o. من or عن from a place), rouse (من or عن ه s.o. from a state. e.g., from sleep, etc.), drive ( من or عن ه s.o. from) VII to be stirred up, be roused; to be alarmed (من by or at), feel uneasy (من about s.th.)
زعج za‘aj uneasiness, unrest
ازعاج iz‘āj disturbance
انزعاج inzi‘āj inconvenience, trouble, discomfort; disturbance, confusion
مزعج muz‘aj annoying, troublesome, irksome, inconvenient, unpleasant; harrying; disquieting; unsettling; pl. مزعجات troubles, discomforts
زعر za‘ir thin-haired
ازعر az‘ar  , f. زعراء za‘rā’ thin-haired; tailless
ازعر az‘ar pl. زعران za‘rān (leb., pal.) highwayman, brigand; crook, scoundrel
زعارة za‘āra maliciousness, meanness
زعرور zū‘rūr pl. زعارير za‘ārīr  ill- tempered, peevish, testy, irascible; azarole, Neapolitan medlar (Crataegus azarolus; bot.)
زعزع za‘za‘a to shake violently, convulse, rock (ھ s.th.); to shake, upset (ھ e.g., a
resolve, a belief, etc.) II taza‘zaa to be convulsed; to work loose, wobble, be loose; to shake, rock, totter │يتزعزع ال unshakable
ريح زعزعان and za‘za‘ rīḥ ريح زعزع
(za‘za‘ān) violent gale, hurricane
زعزعة za‘za‘a pl. زعازع convulsion, shock, concussion
زعزوع za‘zū‘ lean, skinny, lanky, spindling
مزعزع muza‘za‘ convulsed, shocked; upset, disorganized; tottering, shaky, wobbly, unsteady, precarious
متزعزع mutaza‘zi‘ unsteady, shaky, wobbly, precarious; tottering, rocking; fickle, uncertain, changeable
زعط za‘aṭa (za‘ṭ) to drive away
زعف za‘afa a (za‘f) to kill instantly (ه s.o.) IV do.
زعاف سم samm zi‘āf a rapidly killing, deadly poison
زعفران za‘farān saffron
زعق za‘aqa a (za‘q) to cry, yell, shriek, scream
زعق za‘q clamor, shouting, crying, screaming, yelling
زعقة za‘qa pl. za‘aqāt cry, outcry, yell, scream, shriek
زعيق za‘īq clamor, shouting, crying, screaming, yelling
زعل za‘ila a (za‘al) to be bored, be fed up (من with s.th.), be tired (من of); to be annoyed, angry II to annoy, vex (ه s.o.) IV to trouble, annoy (ه s.o.)
زعل za‘al displeasure, annoyance, irritation, vexation
زعل za‘il annoyed, angry, vexed, put out
زعالن za‘lān  annoyed, angry, vexed, put out
زاعولة zā‘ūla annoyance, anger, irritation) vexation
زعم za‘ama u (za‘m) to maintain, allege, claim, pretend (ان that), declare (ان ل to
s.o. that); to believe; to take (ھ ه s.o. for or
 to be ...), regard (ھ ه s.o. as); │ لنفسه زعم to claim for o.s. (ھ s.th.) V to set o.s. up as leader; to 377 be the leader (ه of), lead, command (ھ a body of soldier, or the like); to pretend to be the leader, pose as leader, be bossy
زعم za‘m allegation, claim │زعمھم في as they claim, III they say
زعيم za‘īm, pl. زعماء zu‘amā’  leader; ringleader; colonel (Ir. 1922); brigadier general (mil.; formerly syr.); guarantor (ب of)
زعامة za‘āma leadership; leading position in politics
مزاعم mazā‘im  allegation; claims, pretensions; assumptions, conjectures
مزعوم maz‘ūm pretended, claimed; alleged, so-called
زعنفة zi‘nifa pl. زعانف za‘ānif , horde, pack, mob, rabble, rifraff; low hue, mean;
pl. fins (of fish); flippers (of whale, seal, and the like)
زغب zagab down, lid, fuzz
زغب zagib downy, fluffy, fuzzy, covered with fuzz
ازغب azgab  downy, fluffy, fuzzy, covered with fuzz
زغبر zagbar nap (of a fabric) │ بزغبره اخذhe took all of it
زغد zagada a to nudge, poke (ه s.o.)
زغر zagara a (eg.) to eye (الى or ل s.th., s.o.), lear (الى or ل at)
زغرد zagrada (زغردة zagrada) to utter shrill, long-drawn and trilling sounds (as a manifestation of joy by Arab women)
زغاريد zagārīd  shrill, trilling cries of joy (of women)
زغرد = zagraṭa زغرط
زغاريد = zagārīṭ  زغاريط
زغزغ zagzaga to hide, conceal (ھ s.th.); (eg.) to tickle (ه s.o.)
زغطة zuguṭṭa (eg.) hiccup
زغل zagala a (zag,) to pour out (ھ s.th.); to counterfeit (ھ e.g., coins), adulterate, debase (ھ s.th.)
زغل zagal counterfeit money
mazāgil  مزاغل pl. mazgal مزغل
loophole, embrasure
زغلل zuglala to dazzIe (النظر an-naẓar the eyes)
زغلول zuglūl pl. زغاليل zagālīl  baby, infant; zaglūl (eg.) squab, young pigeon
زف zaffa (1  pers. perf. zafaftu) i (zaff, زفوف zufūf) to hurry; -- u (zaff, زفاف zifāf) to conduct in solemn procession (ھا the bride, على or الى to the bridegroom); pass. الى زفت zuffat ilā to be married off to, be given in marriage to; to conduct in solemn procession to her new home (ھا the bride, also said of the bridegroom); to inform ( الى s.o., ھ of s.th.), tell (ھ الى s.th. to s.o.)
│الى البشرى زف (bušrā) to bring glad tidings to
زفة zaffa procession (of people), wedding procession; -- one time; زفة zaffatan once (= marratan)
زفاف zifāf wedding, wedding ceremony
│الزفاف ليلة lailat az-z. wedding night زفوف zafūf ostrich; fleet, swift (camel) زفيف zafīf sough(ing) (of the wind) مزفة mizaffa bridal sedan
زفت II to smear with pitch, to pitch; to asphalt (ھ a road)
زفت zift pitch; asphalt │وقطران زفت (qaṭrān) (lit., pitch and tar) unpleasant, annoying, awkward; damned (bad luck)!
mazāfit  مزافت pl. mizfata مزفتة O
asphalting machine
تزفيت tazfīt asphalting
 زفر zafara i (zafr, زفير zafīr) to sigh deeply, heave deep sighs; to pant, groan, moan; 378 to blow off, exhaust, puff out ( ھ air, breath)
زفرة zafra pl. zafarāt sigh, moan
زفير zafīr exhaling, exhalation, expiration; sighing, moaning, moans; see also alphabetically
 زفر II to soil with grease begrime (ھ s.th.)
 زفر zafar grease, greasy food │ثالثاء الزفر talātā’ az-z. Mardi Gras, Shrove Tuesday (Chr.)
زفر zafir greasy; grimy; unclean, dirty, filthy; stinking, rancid, rank
زفزفة zafzafa soughing, whistling (of the wind)
زفن zafana i to dance, gambol
زفير zafīr zephyr cloth
زق zaqqa u (zaqq) to feed (ھ its young ones; of a bird)
زقان ziqāq, زقاق azqāq, ازقاق pl. ziqq زق
zuqqān skin (as a receptacle)
زقاق zuqāq m. and f., pl. ازقة aziqqa
lane, alley; strait, corridor (geogr.)
زقزق zaqzaqa (زقزقة zaqzaqa) to peep, chirp, cheep; to feed (ھ its young ones; of a bird); to dandle, rock in one’s arms (ه a child)
زقزاق zaqzāq pewit, lapwing
الزقازق az-zaqāzīq  Zagazig (city in N Egypt)
 زقلة zuqla and زقلية zuqlīya (eg.) club, cudgel, truncheon
 زقيلة zaqīla pl. زقائل zaqā’il  narrow road, path, trail
زقم zaqama u (zaqm) to swallow gulp, gobble ( ھ food) IV to make (ه s.o.) swallow or gulp down (ھ s.th.) VIII ازدقم izdaqama = I
زقوم zaqqūm zaqqum, an infernal tree with exceedingly bitter fruit, mentioned in the Koran
زقو) زقا) zaqā u to cry, crow, peep, cheep
زقاء zuqā’ crowing (of a rooster)
زكب zakaba u (زكوب zukūb) to fill up, fill (ھ s.th.)
زكيبة zakība pl. زكائب zakā’ib  (eg.) sack, bag, gunny sack
زكرة zukra pl. زكر zukar small (wine)skin; -- a wind instrument resembling the oboe (tun.)
زكم pass. zukima to catch a cold
زكام zukām (common) cold, catarrh
زكمة zakma (common) cold, catarrh
زكانة zakāna flair; intuition
(زكو and زكا (زكى zakā u (زكاء zakā’) to thrive; to grow, increase; to be pure in heart, be just, righteous, good; to be fit, suitable (ب for s.o.), befit (ب s.o.); --zakiya a to grow, increase II to increase, augment, make grow (ھ s.th.); to purify, chasten (ھ s.th.); to justify, vindicate (ه s.o.), vouch for, or bear witness to, s.o.’s (ه) integrity, declare (ه s.o.) honest, upright or just, attest the honorable record of s.o. (ه); to attest the truth, validity or credibility of s.th. (ھ); to command, praise (ه s.o.); to recommend IV to cause to grow; to grow (ھ s.th.) V to be purified, be chastened
زكي zakīy pl. ازكياء azkiyā’  pure; chaste; guiltless, blameless, sinless; also = ذكي dakīy, e.g., زكية رائحة)
زكاء zakā’ growth; (moral) purity, integrity, honesty, righteousness
(زكاة (زكوة zakāh pl. زكا zakan, زكوات zakawāt purity; justness, integrity, honesty; justification, vindication; alms- 379 giving, alms, charity; alms tax (Isl. Law) │الفطر زكاة z. al-fiṭr obligatory donation of foodstuffs required at the end of Ramadan, the month of fasting
ازكى azkā purer; more befitting, more appropriate; better
تزكية tazkiya purification, chastening; pronouncement of s.o.’s integrity or credibility; attentation of (a witness’) honorable record (Isl. Law)
زل zalla (1  pers. perf. zalaltu) i (zall) and zalla (1  pers. perf. zaliltu) a (زلل zalal) to slip; to make a mistake, commit an error, a slip; to slide off s.o. (عن), fail to affect s.o. (عن; said of evil) IV to cause (ه s.o.) to slip; to make (ه s.o.) stumble or trip
زل zall a kind of reed (syr.)
lisān z. زلة اللسان │ lapse slip, zalla زلة
slip of the tongue
زل zalal slip, slipping; lapse; mistake, error, oversight
زالل zulāl cold water البيض زالل z. al- baiḍ white of egg, albumen
 زاللي zulālī albuminous; زالليات zulālīyāt proteins │زاللية مواد (mawādd ) proteins
زالبية zalābiya pl. -āt a kind of doughnut cooked in oil and sprinkled with sugar
 زلج zalaja a (زلوج zulūj) and zalija a to slip; to slide along, glide along V do. │على تزلج الثلج (talj) to skate VII = V
زلج zalj slippery
زليج zalīj slippery
مزلج mizlaj pl. مزالج mazālij  skate
مزالج mizlāj pl. مزاليج mazālīj  (sliding) bolt (on a door)
 زليج zulaij faïence, ornamental tile
زليجي zulaijī faience, ornamental tile
زلزل zalzala to shake, rook, convulse, cause to tremble (ھ ه، s.th., s.o.); pass. zulzila also: to waver, stumble II tazalzala to quake (earth)
زلزلة zalzala pl. زالزل zalāzil earthquake
زلزال zalzāl, zilzāl concussion, shock, convulsion; earthquake
زلط zalaṭa u to swallow, gulp down, gobble (ھ s.th.) II to strip, undress (ه s.o.) V to undress, strip
زلط zulṭ nakedness, nudity
زلط zalaṭ (coll.; n. un. ة) (eg.) gravel, pebbles; road metal, ballast
زلعة zal‘a pl. زلع zila‘ (eg.) a kind of tall clay jar
زلعوم zal‘ūm pl. زالعيم zalā‘īm  gullet, throat
زلف zalafa u (zalf, zalaf, زليف zalīf) to approach (الى s.o. or s.th.), advance (الى toward), go near II to exaggerate, blow up (ھ a report, في in) IV to bring near, bring close (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) V to flatter (الى s.o.), fawn (الى upon s.o.), curry favor, ingratiate
o.s. (الى with s.o., also ل) VIII ازدلف
izdalafa to flatter
زلف zalaf servile flattery, sycophancy, toadyism, bootlicking
زلفة zulfa and زلفى zulfā servile flattery, sycophancy, toadyism, bootlicking
متزلف mutazallif sycophant, toady, bootlicker
زلق zaliqa a (zalaq) and zalaqa u (zalq) to glide, slide; to slip II to make slippery (ھ s.th.); to slip, glide (ھ في s.th. into) IV to cause (ه s.o.) to slip │ ببصره ازلقه (bi- baṣarihī) to look at s.o. sternly or disapprovingly V and VII to glide, slide; to skid, slither, slide (الى into s.th.), to slip; to ski; to skate │ الثلج على انزلق (talj) 380 to ski; to skate VII to slip from s.o.’s (عن) hand, from s.th. (عن)
زلق zaliq slippery
زلقةzalqa (n. vic.) slip, skid, slideslip
زالقة zalāqa slipperiness
زالقة zallāqa pl. -āt sleigh, sledge, sled; toboggan; toboggan chute, sledding course; gutter, eaves trough
مزلق mazlaq pl. مزالق mazāliq  slippery spot; slide, chute; esp. pl. treacherous, perilous ground, pitfalls, dangers, perils
مزلقان mazlaqān (dual) (loading) ramp; gradient, ramp, driveway, access road
مزلق mizlaq skate; مزلقان a pair of skates
skate roller (‘ajalāt) مزلق ذو عجالت O │
مزلقة mizlaqa pl. مزالق mazāliq  sleigh, sledge, sled; toboggan
انزالق inzilāq slipping, sliding, skidding; skiing; skating
door sliding باب منزلق munzaliq: منزلق
 زلم zalam pl. ازالم azlām arrow without head and feathers, used in divination
 زلومة zullūma, zallūma pl. زاللم zalālim  trunk (of an elephant)
زم zamma u (zamm) to tie up, fasten, tighten ( ھ s.th.); to truss up (ھ s.th.) │ بانفه زم (bi- anfihī) to turn up one’s nose, be supercilious II to bridle (ھ a camel), put the bridle (ھ on a camel)
زمام zimām pl. ازمة azimma camel halter, nose rope of the camel; rein, bridle; halter; day hook; register; ground, land │ بزمامه under his supervision, under his direction, األمر زمام z. al-amr reins of power, األمر ازمة على قبض to hold the reins of power in one’s hand, be in control of power, wield power; الحكم زمام تولى tawallā
z. al-ḥukm to seize the reins of power, assume power
 زمت V to be prim, sedate, staid
زمت tazammut primness gravity, sedateness
متزمت mutazammit grave, stern, staid, sedate (character); prim; narrow-minded
J'!-j zam;ara (;j~j zam;ara) to .oold, to storm, rage, rave
زمجر zamjara (زمجرة zamjara) to scold; to storm, rage, rave
 زمر zamara i u (zamr, زمير zamīr) to blow, play (a wind instrument) II do.
زمر zamr blowing, playing (of a wind instrument)
زمر zamr pl. زمور zumūr a wind instrument resembling the shoe; horn (of an automobile; syr.)
زمرة zumra pl. زمر zumar troop; group (of people); دموية زمرة blood group
زمار zammār player (on a wind instrument), piper
زمارة zammāra, zummāra pl. زمامير zamāmīr  (eg.) a wood-wind instrument consisting of two pipes, related to the clarinet; siren │اإلنذار زمارة z. al-indār warning siren
مزمار mizmār single-pipe wood-wind instrument resembling the oboe
mazāmīr  مزامير pl. mazmūr مزمور
psalm
 ازمير izmīr  Izmir, Smyrna (seaport in W Turkey)
زمرد zumurrud emerald
زمردى zumurrudī emerald(-colored)
زمزم zamzama to rumble, roll (thunder); to murmur
زمزم zamzam copious, abundant (esp. water); Zemzem, name of a well in Mecca
زمزمية zamzamīya water flasak, canteen; O thermos bottle
زمزمة zamzama pl. زمازم zamāzim  roll of thunder; roar of a lion 381
زمط zamaṭa to escape, slip away
زمع II end IV to determine (ھ على، on), decide, resolve, be determined (ھ على، to do s.th.)
مزمع muzmi‘ determined, rseolved; -- muzma‘ and عليه مزمع decided; imminent; forthcoming, prospective │ المزمع المؤتمر في عقده ... al-mu’tamar al-m. ‘aqduhū fī the conference which is to be held on (with following date)
  زمل III to keep (ه s.o.) company, be s.o.’s (ه) companion, be a colleague or associate (ه في of s.o. in s.th.); to accompany (ه s.o.) VI to be comrades, be close companions
زملة zumla party, company (of people)
زميل zamīl pl. زمالء zumalā’  companion, crony, associate, comrade; colleague; accomplice
زميلة zamiīla pl. -āt (woman) companion; (woman) colleague; sister ship
زمالة zamāla comradeship; colleagueship; fellowship │دراسية زمالة (dirāsīya) scholarship, stipend (ir.)
chisel azāmīl  ازاميل pl. izmīl ازميل 
زمن zamina a (زمانة zamāna) to be chronically ill IV to stay long, remain (ب at a place); to last long; to be chronic (disease)
زمن zaman pl. ازمان azmān time; period, stretch of time; duration; زمنا zamanan for some time
زمنة zamana period or time
zamnā زمنى pl. zamīn زمين zamin, زمن
chronically ill
زمان zamān pl. ازمنة azmina time; duration; fortune, late, destiny │ زمان من for some time (past), for quite a while; على الزمان always, ever; زمانه اھل ahl z. his contemporaries
زمنى zamanī temporal, time (adj.); worldly, earthly; passing, transient, transitory; secular │زمنية الغام mines with time fuse; زمنية قنبلة (qunbula) time bomb
زماني zamānī temporal, time; worldly, earthly; passing, transient, transitory; secular
zamānīya زمانية and zamanīya زمنية
period or time, given time
زمانة zamāna chronic illness
 مزمن muzmin lasting, enduring, long, lived; old, deep-seated, inveterate; chronic
زمھر zamhara to become red, flushed, blood- shot IV ازمھر izmaharra do.
زمھرير zamharīr bitter cold, severe frost
زن zanna u (zann) to buzz, drone (insect)
زن zann buzz(ing), drone
زنأ zana’a to be limited, be restricted, be confined, be curbed, be suppressed II to restrict, keep within bounds, beset, harry, drive in a corner (على s.o.)
زنبر II tazanbara to display proud, haughty manners (على toward s.o.)
زنبور zunbūr pl. زنابير zanābīr  hornet
زنبرك zanbarak, zunburuk, zunburak pl. زنابك (metal) spring; spiral spring; cock (of a rifle, etc.)
زنبق zanbaq (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. زنابق zanābiq 
lily; iris (bot.)
زنبرك = zanbalik زنبلك □
زنبيل zanbīl, zinbīl pl. زناببيل zanābīl  basket made of palm leaves
زنتاري zintārī dysentery
زنج zanj, zinj (coll.) pl. زنوج zunūj Negro(es)
زنجي zanjī, zinjī Negro (adj. and n.)
زنجبار zanjabār Zanzibar (island and seaport of E African coast) 382
زنجبيل zanjabīl ginger
 زنجر zanjara to flip, snap (with the fingers)
 زنجار zinjār verdigris
زنجفر zunjufr, zinjafr cinnabar
حساب│ chain zanājīr  زناجير pl. zinjīr زنجير bookkeeping double-entry الزنجير
زنخ zanika a (zanak) to turn rancid
زنخ zanik rancid, rank
زند zand m. and f., pl. زناد zinād, زنود zunūd stick of a fire drill, a primitive device for kindling fire; by extension, the whole fire drill; -- zand, zind (pl. زنود zunūd) ulna (anat.); forearm
زناد zinād pl. ازند aznida fire steel; cock, hammer (of a rifle, etc.) │ الزناد حجر ḥajar az-zinād flint
زندق II tazandaqa to be a freethinker, an atheist
زندقة zandaqa atheism
زنديق zindīq pl. زنادقة zanādiqa zendik, unbeliever, freethinker, atheist
s.o. at glare to (bi-‘ainihī) زنر اليه بعينه II: زنر
زنار zunnār and زنارة zunnāra pl.
زنانير zanānīr  belt, girdle; sash; band or rope worn around the waist; cross stripe, traverse band
زنزانة zinzāna pl. -āt prison cell (eg.)
زنلخت zanzalakt China tree (Melia azedarach;
bot.)
زنطارية zinṭārīya dysentery
زنق zanaqa i (rang) to tighten, constrict (ھ s.th.); to hobble (ھ an animal) II to keep on short rations, scrimp (على s.o.), be stingy, tight-fisted (على toward)
زنقة zanaqa (magr. zanga) pl. زنق zinaq
narrow street, lane, alley, dead-end street
زنق zināq neckband, collar
زنك zink zinc
زنمردة zanmarda virago, termagant
زنيم zanīm low, despised, ignoble, mean; bastard; stranger, outsider
زنى zanā i (زنا ,زنى zinan, زناء zinā’) to commit adultery, fornicate, whore
زنى zinan adultery; fornication
زناء zinā’ adultery; fornication
زان zānin pl.; زناة zunāh fornicator, adulterer
زاننية zāniya pl. زوان zawānin  whore, harlot; adulteress
زھد zahada a, zahida a and zahuda u (zuhd) to abstain (في from, also ھ ,عن), renounce, abandon, foresake (في s.th., also ھ عن،), withdraw (ھ في، from), refuse to have anything to do with (في زھد │ (ھ في، الدنيا(dunyā) to renounce pleasure in worldly things, become an ascetic, lead a pious, ascetic life II to induce (ه s.o.) to withdraw or abstain (في from); to spoil s.o.’s (ه) pleasure in (في), arouse a dislike ( ه في in s.o. for) V to practice asceticism,
 withdraw from the world X to deem little, insignificant, trifling, small
زھد zuhd (voluntary) renunciation (في of s.th.); jndifference (في to, esp. to worldly things); abstemiousness, abstinence; asceticism │ الدنيا في الزھد (dunyā) asceticism
زھيد zahīd little, low, moderate (esp. price), insignificant, peltry, trifling. small; a little, a small amount (في of)
زھادة zahāda smallness, lowness, moderateness
تزھد tazahhud asceticism, life of retirement devoted to the service of God
زھد zāhid pl. زھاد zuhhād abstemious, abstinent, continent, self-denying; ascetic 383
زھر zahara a (زھور zuhūr) to shine, give light, be radiant IV to glow, gleam, glare, shine; to blossom, be in bloom (plant, flower) VIII ازدھر izdahara to shine brightly, be radiant; to blossom, be in bloom; to flourish, prosper, thrive
zuhūr, زھور pl. )ة un. n. (coll.; zahr, زھر ازاھير azāhir , ازاھر azhār, ازھار azhur, ازھر iron --cast blossoms; flowers; azāhīr  at-tālūt z. زھر الحديد( │زھر الثالوث (also زھر العسل primrose; زھر الربيع pansy;
al-‘asal honeysuckle; اللؤلؤ زھر z. al-lu’lu’
daisy; الزھر ماء orange-flower water
زھرة zahra (n. un.) pl. āt flower, blossom; splendor, beauty
زھرة zuhra brilliancy, light, brightness; beauty │الغسيل زھرة bluing
الزھرة az-zuhara the planet Venus
امراض زھرية│ syphilis zuharzi زھرى
venereal diseases
زھر zuhrīya pl. -āt flower vase
زھار zahhār, florist
زھراوى zahrāwī gay, merry, cheerful (person)
ازھر azhar  shining, luminous, radiant, brilliant; bright; -- (elative) more radiant
and جامع األزھر moon; and sun األزھران│ and Mosque Azhar Al الجامع األزھر Cairo in University
ازھرى azharī of or pertaining to Al Azhar; (pl. -ūn) Azhar student
مزھر mizhar pl. مزاھر mazāhir  ancient Arabic variety of the lute; (now pronounced mazhar) a kind of tambourine (eg.)
مزھرية mazharīya flowerpot تزھير tazhīr bloom, florescence ازھار izhār florescence
ازدھار izdihār flourishing, florescence, bloom, heyday
زاھر zāhir shining, luminous, radiant, brilliant; bright
مزھر muzhir blooming, in bloom; shining, luminous, bright
to زھف الى الموت zuhūf): زھوف( a zahafa زھف ازدھف الى VIII death of verge the on be do. الموت
زھق zahaqa a (zahq, زھوق zuhūq) to die, pass away, run out, come to nothing; نفسه زھقت (nafsuhū) and روحه زھقت (rūḥuhū) to give up the ghost, die; to weary, become tired ( من of s.th.), be disgusted (من with s.th.) IV to bring about the ruin or downfall of s.th. (ھ); to destroy, annihilate (ھ s.th.); ((الروح النفس ازھق to be disgusting, be revolting
زھوق zuhūq dying, passing, bound to vanish
زھم zuhm offensive smell
زھم zahm malodorous, fetid زھمة zuhma offensive smell زھومة zuhūma offensive smell
زھو) زھا) zahā u (zahw) to blossom, flower, be in bloom; to grow, thrive; to shine brightly, be radiant, glow, gleam; to give
o.s. airs, be haughty, conceited; to pride
o.s. (ب upon, both in a favorable and a pejorative sense); pass. زھى zuhiya to be proud, conceited (ب of), pride o.s. (ب on), boast (ب of), vaunt (ب s.th.) IV to blossom, flower, be in bloom; to grow, thrive; to give o.s. airs, be conceited, be boastful VIII ازدھى izdahā and pass. uzduhiya to be self-satisfied, complacent, conceited, proud; izdahā to shine (ب at, in s.th.), have (ب an accomplishment) to show; to boast (ب of s.th.), vaunt (ب s.th.)
 زھو zahw and zuhuw bloom, florescence; splendor; beauty; pride; haughtiness, arrogance; vanity, a vain or futile thing or things; fun, play, amusement 384
زھى zahīy brilliant, splendid, magnificent, gorgeous, sumptuous
زھاء zahā’ radiance, brilliancy, splendor
زھاء zuhā’ number, amount; zuhā’a
roughly, about, some (with foll. figure)
ازھى azhā more flourishing; prouder, more conceited
ازدھاء izdihā’ bloom, florescence, flourishing; heyday; shining; glittering, splendor, radiance; pride (both in a favorable and a pejorative sense)
زاه zāhin shining, brilliant, radiant, resplendent; glowing; splendid, gorgeous, magnificent, gaudy, beautiful
مزھو mazhūw proud (ب of); haughty, supercilious, vainglorious; cocky, overbearing
زبع see زوبعة
 زوج II to pair, couple (من or ھ ب s.th. with), join in pairs or couples (ھ s.th.); to double, geminate (ھ s.th.); to employ parallelism (rhet.); to marry off, give in marriage (من ھا ھ، ه، a girl to s.o.) III to form a pair or couple; to use in parallel construction, join in a pair (بين two words, rhet.); to marry, join in wedlock, unite in matrimony (و -- بين s.o. with) V to get married (ه على، ب، ,من with), marry (,ب ,من ه على، s.o.) VI to intermarry; to pair, come together forming a pair, be in pairs, be double VIII ازدوج izdawaja to pair, he in pairs, be double, appear twice
زوجة zauja pl. ازواج azwāj one of a pair; husband; wife; mate, partner; couple, pair (also, e.g., of shoes); dual زوجان couple
زوجة zauja pl. -āt wife
زيجة zīja marriage, wedding
زوجي zaujī in pairs, paired; double; marital, matrimonial, conjugal; doubles (tennis)
زيجي zījī marital, matrimonial, conjugal, connubial
زوجية zaujīya pl. -āt matrimony, marriage
زواج zawāj marriage (من with); wedding; matrimony, wedlock │وحدة الزواج wahdat az-z. monogamy
مزاوج mizwāj frequently marrying
تزويج tazwīj marrying off (of a woman,
من to)
زواج zawāj doubling, duplication; parallelism (rhet.)
مزاوجة muzāwaja pairing, coupling, close union (of two things)
تزوج tazawwuj marriage
تزاوج tazāwuj intermarriage
ازدواج izdiwāj pairedness doubleness; O coupling (el.) │ضريبي ازدواج (ḍarībī) double taxation
متزوج mutazawwij married
مزدوج muzdawij double, twofold, two- (e.g., of a railroad: two-track)
 زاج look up alphabetically
i zāḥa زيح( زاح( = u zāḥa )زاح )زوح
زود II to supply with provisions (ھ ه s.o.), provision (ب ھ, s.o. with); to provide, supply, equip (ه ھ، ب s.o., s.th. with); to endow (ب ه s.o. with); to enrich (ب ھ s.th. with) IV to supply with provisions (ه s.o.) V to be supplied (with provisions); to take along provisions (on a journey); to learn ( من from s.o.); to provide o.s., supply o.s equip o.s. (ب with)
azwida ازودة azwād, ازواد pl. zād زاد
provisions, supplies, stores زواد zawād provisions زوادة zuwwāda provisions
مزائد mazāwid , مزاود pl. mizwad مزود
mazāid  provision bag, haversack 385
مزادة mazāda provision bag, haversack
تزويد tazwīd supply, purveyance (ب of). provision, equipment (ب with); manning (of ships)
زيد see زوائد pl. زائدة
 مزود muzawwid pl. -ūn contractor, supplier, furnisher, purveyor, victualer, caterer
مزود muzawwad provided, supplied, furnished (ب with); equipped (ب with); armed (ب with guns) ; conneoted (ب with), attended, accompanied (ب by)
زور) زار) zāra u (zaur, زيارة ziyāra) to visit (ه s.o.), call (ه on s.o.), pay a visit (ه to); to afflict (ه s.o.) II to forge, falsify, counterfeit (ه s.th.); to fake, simulate VI to exchange visits IX to turn aside, turn away, dissociate o.s. (عن from); to be averse (عن to s.th.); به ازور to turn s.o. away, alienate s.o. (عن from) X to desire s.o.’s (ه) visit
زور zaur upper part of the chest; throat
throat sore آالم الزور│
زور zūr lie, untruth; falsehood │شھادة الزور šahādat az-z. false testimony
زور zūr force │ بالزور by force, forcibly
زور zawar inclination, obliqueness, slant; crookedness; falseness; perfidy, insidiousness; squint
زورة zaura (n. vic.) pl. -āt visit, call
زيارة ziyāra pl. -āt visit; call (social, of a doctor)
ازور azwar , f. زوراء zaurā’ , pl. زور zūr inclined, slanting, oblique; crooked, curved; squint-eyed, cross-eyed
مزار mazār pl. -āt place which one visits; shrine, sanctuary
تزوير tazwīr forgery, falsification │ السندات في تزوير (sanadāt) falsification of documents
ازورار izwirār turning away; averseness, aversion, dislike, distaste
زائر zā’ir pl. -ūn, زوار zuwwār, f. زائرة zā’ira pl. -āt, زور zuwwar visitor, caller, guest
مزور mazūr visited
مزور muzawwar forged, false, counterfeit; obtained by swindle, faked
زورق zauraq pl. زوارق zawāriq  boat, rowboat, skiff │بخاري زورق (bukhārī) steam launch; الصيد زورق z. aṣ-ṣaid fishing boat; زورق
زورق ناصف O lifeboat; an-najāh z. النجاة
torpedo boat
 زوغ) زاغ) zāga u (zaug, زوغان zawagān) to turn aside, depart, deviate (عن from), swerve; to deviate from truth, to swindle; see also زيغ VI to turn aside, swerve
 زاغ look up alphabetically
زوفاء zūfā’, زوفى zūfā hyssop (bot.)
 زوق II to adorn, embellish, ornament, decorate (ھ s.th.); to picture, visualize (ھ a story, in one’s imagination)
زواق zawāq embellishment, adornment, ornamentation; decoration; finery, attire; face painting, make-up, cosmetics
مزوق muzawwaq adorned, embellished, ornamented, decorated; florid, flowery (speech); dressed up, meretricious, showy, gaudy
alphabetically up look زاووق، زاؤوق 
زول) and زيل) زال zāla (1  pers. perf. zultu) u ( زوال zawāl) to go away, withdraw (عن or من from), abandon, leave (عن or من s.o. or s.th.); to disappear, vanish; to abate, calm down, die down, come to an end; to go down, set; -- (1  pers. perf. ziltu) a (zail) to cease (with negations only) │of :زول الغضب منه زال (gaḍab) his wrath abated; زال الوجود عن to cease to exist; -- of زيل: with neg. ٦٨٣ يزل لم زال، ما (yazal), يزال ال equivalent to Engl. “still, yet”: افعله زلت ما (af‘aluhū) I have not ceased to do it, I (am) still do(ing) it; قائما زال ما he is still standing, في زال ما he has not ceased to be or to remain in, he is still in; حاجة في يزال ال اليه he is still in need of it, he still needs it; منه ذكر على يزال ال (dikrin) he still remembers him II زول zawwala to remove, eliminate (ھ s.th.), -- زيل zayyala to separate, break up, disperse, scatter (ھ s.th.) III زاول zāwala to pursue (ھ s.th.), devote o.s. apply o.s. (ھ to); -- زايل zāyala to separate, part (ه ھ، from), leave, quit, abandon (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to separate
(بين s.th.) │الدار زايل to move out of the house, leave the house IV to cause to cease or stop, make disappear or vanish (ھ s.th.), to remove, eliminate (ھ s.th.), put an end (ھ to s.th.), do away (ھ with s.th.), make a clean sweep (ھ of s.th.) VI تزايل
 tazāyala to be disjointed, incoherent; to pass away, cease, stop
زول zaul pl. ازوال azwāl person, body, figure, nightly apparition, specter, ghost, phantom, spirit
زوال zawāl end, passage, extinction, disappearance, vanishing, cessation; setting (of the sun); noon │الزوال سريع ephemeral, evanescent, fleeting, الزوال بعد in the afternoon; الزوال عند around noon, by noon; الزوال خط kaṯṭ az-z. meridian
atfour في الساعة الرابعة زوالية zawālī: زوالي p.m. four at afternoon, the in o’clock
زولية zūlīya pl. زوالي zawālī (ir., saud.) knotted rug
mazāwil  مزاول pl. mizwala مزولة
sundial
مزاولة muzāwala pursuit (of s.th.), application (to); assiduous study; practice (of some work, of a profession)
ازالة izāla removal, elimination
زائل zā’il transitory, passing, evanescent, fleeting, ephemeral, short- lived
زولوجيا zōlōjiyā zoology
زولوجي zōlōjī zoologic(al)
زوم) زام) zāma u (eg.) to growl, snarl (dog) II to mumble, mutter
زوم zūm pl. ازوام azwām juice, sap
 زانة زان، look up alphabetically
 زوان ziwān, zuwān = زؤان (q.v.)
زوى zawā i to contract, wrinkle, knit (ھ s.th., e.g., the eyebrows), to remove (ھ s.th.); to hide, conceal (ھ s.th.) │بين ما زوى عينيه (‘ainaihi) he knitted his eye-brows, he frowned (in anger, and the like) II and V to withdraw into a corner, go into seclusion, retire VII do., to keep to o.s., live in seclusion or retirement │في انزوى جلده (jildihī) to crawl inside o.s. (out of shame, and the like)
انزواء inziwā’ retirement, seclusion, isolation
زاوية zāwiya pl. زوايا zawāyā corner, nook; angle (math.); a small mosque, prayer room; (North Afr.) small cupolaed
mosque erected over the tomb of a Muslim saint, with teaching facilities and a hospice attached to it, usually the establishment of a religious order │الزاوية الحادة (ḥādda) acute angle, الخارجة الزاوية external angle, الزوايا متساوى mutasāwī az-
(munfarija) الزاوية المنفرجة equiangular, z. حجر angle, right الزاوية القائمة angle, obtuse من زوايا cornerstone; az-z. ḥajar الزاوية angles different from (muktalifa) مختلفة aspects) (i.e.,
منزو munzawin seclusive, secluding; retired, secluded, outlying, remote, out-of- the-way, obscure
زي II زيا زيى، zayyā to dress, clothe, costume (ه ب s.o. in) V تزيا تزيى، tazayyā to dress, put on a dress or costume; to dress up, smarten o.s. up, to be dressed, be clad (ب in), wear (ب th.) 387
زي ziyy pl. ازياء azyā’ clothing, dress, apparel, attire; O uniform; outward appearance, make-up; costume; style of dress, manner of dressing; fashion; exterior, guise, form, shape │الزي على الجديد fashionable, modish, stylish
زيبق zībaq (= زئبق zi‘baq) quicksilver, mercury
زيت II to oil, lubricate, grease (ھ a machine, and the like); to add oil (ھ to some food)
زيت zait pl. زيوت zuyūt oil (edible, fuel, motor oil, etc.) │حار زيت (ḥārr) linseed oil; حلو زيت (ḥulw) sweet oil, oil free of hydrogen sulfide; الحوت زيت z. al-ḥūt cod- liver oil; الخروع زيت z. al-kirwa‘ castor oil; السمك زيت z. as-samak cod-liver oil; زيت التشحيم lubricating oil; االستصباح زيت fuel oil; الغاز زيت z. al-gāz kerosene
زيتي zaitī oily, oil (adj.), oil-bearing │ زيتية صورة or زيتية لوحة (ṣūra, lauḥa) oil painting
زيات zayyāt oil dealer, oilman
زيتون zaitūn (coll.; n. un. ة) olive tree; olive(s) │الزيتون احد aḥad az-z. Palm Sunday (Chr.); ازيتون جبل jabal az-z.
Mount of Olives (Jerusalem)
زيتونة zaitūna (n. un.) pl. -āt olive tree; olive │الزيتونة جامع the Zaitouna Mosque (large mosque and university in Tunis)
 زيتوني zaitūnī olivaceous, olive-colored, olive-green; (pl. -ūn) student of the Great Mosque of Tunis
az-az. aḥad احد الزيتونية zaitūnīya, زيتونية
Palm Sunday (Cop.-Chr.) مزيتة mazyata oil can, oiler مزيت muzayyat oiled
 زيج zīj leveling line (used by masons); ephemeris, astronomical almanac
زوج see zījī زيجي and zīja زيجة 
زيح) زاح) zāḥa i (zaiḥ, zuyūḥ, زيحان zayaḥān) to go away, depart, leave IV to remove, drive away, banish (ھ s.th.), do away with (ھ); to take away (ھ s.th.); to pull away, throw back (ھ a curtain, a veil, etc., عن from s.th.) │عن اللثام ازاح to reveal, disclose s.th.; تمثال عن الستار ازاح (timtāl) to unveil a monument VII to go away, depart, leave; to be pulled away, be thrown back (curtain)
زيح zīh pl. ازياح azyāḥ (straight) line زياح zayyāḥ pl. -āt religious procession ازاحة izāḥa removal, abolition │ازاحة
الستار unveiling (of a monument)
زيد) زاد) zāda i (زيادة ziyāda) to become greater, become more, grow, increase, be compounded, multiply; to be greater, be more, amount to more (عن or على than), exceed (عن or على s.th., an amount, ب by), go beyond an amount or number (على); to augment, increase, compound (ھ s.th.), make (ھ s.th.) grow or increase; to step up, raise (ھ من، s.th., ھ الى s.th. to); to add (ھ على s.th. to); to add, make additions ( على to), enlarge (على s.th.); to extend, expand, further, advance, promote, intensify (في or من s.th.); to give more (ه ھ to s.o. of s.th.) │على يزيد ال it is no more than ... , it is only .. ; قائال زاد he added (in speech followed by quotation); ذلك على زد (zid) (prop.: add to it that ...) in addition to that there is ..., what’s more, there is ...; furthermore, moreover; علما زاده (‘ilman) to tell s.o. more about it, supply s.o. with more information II to increase, augment, compound, make grow m to make a higher bid (ه than s.o.), outbid (ه s.o.; at an auction) V to increase; to nee, go up (prices); to make additions, add
embellishments of one’s own, exaggerate (in telling s.th.); to be long-winded, verbose │المعرفة من العلم، من تزيد (‘ilm, ma‘rifa) to acquire additional knowledge, increase one’s knowledge VI 388 to outbid one another; to increase gradually, be growing; to become more intense, intensify; to become more and more, exceed more and more (من s.th.) VIII ازداد izdāda to grow, be growing, increase, be compounded, multiply │بكاء ازداد (bukā’an) he wept more and more X to demand more, ask for more, go up with one’s demands; to try to achieve more; to aim or work at an increase, expansion or extension (ھ of); to ask (ه s.o.) to give more of s.th.
الزيدية az-zaidīya a Shiitic group forming an independent commonwealth (Yemen)
الزيود az-zuyūd the Zaidites, adherents of the Zaidiya sect
زيادة ziyāda increase, increment, accretion, growth; surplus, overplus, excess; increase, augmentation, raising, stepping up; enhancement, elevation, intensification; extra pay, allowance (in addition to the salary); addition; زيادة ziyādatan in addition, additionally │زيادة عن (ziyādatan) over and above, beyond, in excess of; regardless of; aside from; حمله تحمله عن زيادة ḥammalahū z. ‘an taḥammulihi he loaded him with more than he could carry; ذلك على زيادة (ziyādatan) moreover, besides; المواليد زيادة excess of births; اإليضاح لزيادة (īḍāḥ) in order to make it even clearer, for further elucidation
ازيد azyad  more excessive, higher, greater, bigger
مزاد mazād pl. -āt auction, public sale
مزيد mazīd an exceeding (على of s.th.); excess, superabundance; high degree, large extent; utmost, maximum; (with foll. genit.) excessive, extreme, utmost, highest, greatest, superlative; pass. partic. of I: increased, etc.; the derivative stems of the verb (gram.) │الشكر بمزيد bi-m. iš- šukr with many, many thanks; األسف بمزيد bi-m. il-asaf with the greatest regret; بمزيد االرتياح with extreme satisfaction; من له ليس
 مزيد it is unsurpassable, it’s not to be outdone
مزايدة muzāyada pl. -āt auction, public sale
تزيد tazayyud exaggeration (in reporting), one’s own embellishments or additions, fables, yarn
تزايد tazāyud (gradual) increase, increment, growth
ازدياد izdiyād increase, growth, rise, intensification
استزادة istizāda a striving for more; pursuit of an increase, expansion or extension; desire or request for more │لم لمستزيد استزادة يبق (yabqa, li-mustazīdin) there is nothing to be added, nothing more need be said about it
زائد zā’id increasing, growing; excessive, immoderate; exceeding (عن s.th.), in excess (عن of); additional, extra, supernumerary │الحاجة على زائد more than necessary, surplus
زائدة zā’ida pl. زوائد zawā’id  appendage, appendix (anat., zool., bot.); outgrowth (med.) │معوية زائدة (mi‘awīya) and دودية زائدة (dūdīya) vermiform appendix (anat.)
مزايد muzāyid pl. -ūn bidder, outbidder (at an auction)
متزايد mutazāyid steadily increasing, swelling
 زير II (mor.) to close (ھ a button)
 زير zīr pl. ازيار azyār, زيار ziyār (eg., magr.) large, almost conical jar, made of porous clay, for storing water
 زير zīr the highest string of stringed instruments (mus.) 389
زيز zīz (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. زيزان zīzān
cicada; chrysalis
زيزفون zaizafūn jujube (Zizyphus; bot.); linden tree
 زيغ) زاغ) zāga i (zaig, زيغان zayagān) to turn aside; to depart, deviate (عن from); to swerve; to turn away (عن from), turn one’s back (عن on); to wander, stray, roam (eyes) IV to cause (ھ s.th.) to deviate │
بصره عني ازاغ (baṣarahū) he looked past me, he snubbed me
زيغ zaig and زيغان zayagān a turning aside; deviation, departure (عن from) │زيغ وسداد (sadād) erring and doing right, wrong and right
زائغ zāig deviating, divergent; false, wrong, distorted, perverted │زائغة نظرات (nazarāt) wandering glances
 زاغ look up alphabetically
زيف) زاف) zāfa i (zaif) to be false, be spurious II to counterfeit (ھ money); to declare (ھ s.th.) to be false or spurious
زيف zaif falseness; pride; (pl. زيوف
zuyūf) false, spurious, forged, counterfeit
ازيف azyaf  falser, more spurious
تزييف tazyīf falsification, forgery, counterfeiting
زائف zā’if false; forged, counterfeit, spurious │زائفة اخبار false reports; زائفة نقود counterfeit money
مزيف muzayyif forger, counterfeiter
مزيف muzayyaf forged; counterfeit, false, spurious; pseudo-
 زيق II (eg.) to creak, screech
 زيق zīq pl. ازياق azyāq collar, neckband; border, hem (of a garment)
زول see VI III, II, and )زال )زيل
 زين) زان) zāna i (zain) to decorate, adorn (ھ s.th.) II to adorn, decorate, embellish, ornament (ھ s.th.); to grace (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.);to shave (ه s.o.); نفسھا زينت (nafsahā) to make herself up (lady); to paint in glowing tones, present in a favorable light, extol (ھ الى ل، s.th. to s.o.); to conjure up ( ه s.th., ل before s.o.’s eyes), create visions (ھ of s.th., ل in s.o.’s mind), lead s.o. (ل) to believe (ان that); to give (ل s.o.) the idea (ان to do s.th.), suggest (ان ل to s.o. to do s.th.) V to be decorated, be adorned; to dress up, smarten o.s. up, spruce up, preen o.s.; to shave, get a shave VIII ازدان
izdāna to be decorated, be adorned; to be graced
زين zain beauty; beautiful, nice, pretty
 زينة zīna pl. -āt embellishment, adornment, ornament, decoration; cloth., attire, finery; toilette │الوجه زينة z. al-wajh make-up; الزينة بيت bait az-z. beauty shop; الزينة اشجار ornamental tress; الزينة نباتات nabātāt az-z. ornamental plants; الزينة خوان kuwān az-z. dressing table; الزينة غرفة gurfat az-z. dressing room
زيان zayyān beautiful
زيان ziyān embellishment, adornment, decoration; ornament
زيانة ziyāna barber’s or hairdresser’s trade
تزيين tazyīn adorning, decoration, ornamentation; make-believe, sham, pretense
مزين muzayyin barber, hairdresser
مزين muzayyin decorated, ornamented, adorned (ب with); graced (ب with)
مزدان muzdān decorated, ornamented, adorned (ب with); graced (ب with)
 زان look up alphabetically
زينكو zinkō zinc 390

س
س sa shortened form of سوف saufa (q.v.)
ساتان sātān satin
ساج sāj pl. سيجان sījān teak, Indian oak
ساجات sījān castanets
سادة sāda simple; plain, unicolored, uniform (fabric) │سادة قھوة (qahwa) unsweetened coffee
سود  see سؤدد
سئر sa’ira a to remain, be left
سؤر su’r pl. اسآر as’ār rest, remainder, remnant, leftover (esp. of food and beverages)
سؤرة su’ra rest, remainder, remnant, leftover (esp. of food and beverages); vestige of youthful vigor
سائر sā’ir remaining; rest, remainder; (with foll. det. genit.) all
الساسانيون as-sāsānīyūn the Sassanidae, a dynasty of Persian kings (226-651 A.D.)
ساغو sāgō sago
ساكو sākō, ساكوه sack coat, lounge jacket
سأل sa’ala a (سؤال su’āl, مسألة mas’ala, تسآل tas’āl) to ask (عن or ھ ه s.o. s.th. or about s.th.); to inquire (ه عن of s.o. about); to ask (من ھ or ه s.o. for s.th.), request, demand, claim (ھ من or ه from s.o. s.th.) اال سأله sa’alahū illa to implore, adjure s.o. that he
...; اخباره عن سأله to ask s.o. about s.o. else; رأيه سأله (ra’yahā) to ask s.o.’s opinion, consult s.o.; سؤاال سأله to ask s.o. a question; يسأل (yus’alu) he is responsible, answerable (عن for) III to ask, question, interrogate (ه s.o.); to call (ه s.o.) to account IV سؤله اسأله (as’alahū) to fulfill s.o.’s wish, comply with s.o.’s request V tasa’’ala and تسول tasawwala to beg VI to ask; to ask o.s.; to ask one another; تساءل عن) ھل) to ask o.s. whether (about); to inquire (عن about)
سؤل su’l demand, request, wish
سؤلة su’la demand, request, wish
سؤال su’āl pl. اسئلة as’ila question (عن about); request (عن for); inquiry (عن about); demand, claim
سأال sa’’āl given to asking questions, inquisitive, curious
سؤول sa’ūl given to asking questions, inquisitive, curious
مسئلة) مسألة) mas’ala pl. مسائل masā’il  question; issue, problem; matter, affair, case; request
مساءلة musā’ala questioning, interrogation
تسول tasawwu1 begging, beggary
تساؤل tasā’ul (self-directed) question; questioning
sa’ala سألة su’āl, سؤال –ūn, pl. sā’il سائل
questioner; petitioner; beggar
مسؤول mas’ūl responsible, answerable, accountable (عن for)
مسئولية mas’ūlīya pl. -āt responsibility (
عن for)
متسول mutasawwil pl. -ūn beggar
  سام sām Shem (eldest son of Noah)
سامي sāmī Semitic; (pl. -ūn) Semite
الالسامية al-lā-sāmīya anti-Semitism
 سئم sa’ima a (سأم sa’m, سآمة sa’āma) to be weary, tired (من or ھ of s.th.), be bored, fed up (من or ھ with s.th.); to dislike, detest, loathe (ان doing s.th.), have an 391 aversion (ان to doing s.th.) IV to cause or arouse weariness or boredom (ه in s.o.), weary, bore (ه s.o.)
سئم sa’im weary, tired, bored
سؤوم sa’ūm disgusted, weary, fed up
سآمة sa’āma weariness, disgust, boredam, ennui
سب sabba u (sabb) to insult, abuse, call names, revile (ه s.o.), rail (ه at); to curse (ه s.o.); to blaspheme, curse, swear II to cause, provoke, arouse, produce, bring about, effect, occasion (ھ s.th.), give occasion (ھ to s.th.) III to exchange insults or abusive language (ھ with s.o.) V to be caused, be produced (عن by), be the consequence or result (عن of), follow, arise, spring, result ( عن from); to be the reason or cause, be at the bottom (ب or في of), be to blame (في for), be instrumental (في in); to seek reason or motives (الى for s.th.); to account, give a reason or explanation (الى for), justify, motivate (الى s.th.); to use (ب s.th.) as a means (الى for); to trade, be in the retail business VI to insult each other, call one another names, rail at each other VIII = VI
سب sabb abuse, vituperation, insults, cursing
سبة sabba period of time, (long) while
سبة sibba: اآلالم سبة s. al-ālam Passion Week (Chr.)
سبة subba disgrace, shame, dishonor
سبب sabab pl. اسباب asbāb rope, tent rope; means for obtaining s.th.; reason, cause, motive, occasion (with fall. genit. or في: of); means of subsistence; (esp. pl.) relations (between people) │اكبر سبب main reason; الحكم اسباب a. al-ḥukm opinion (jur.); الراحة اسباب luxury; بسبب bi-sababi because of, on account of, due to, by; بسبب ذلك because of that, for that reason,
therefore; فيه السبب كان (sababa) to be the cause of s.th., be to blame for s.th.; يرجع   الى السبب (yarji‘u) the reason is to be found in ...; الحديثة الحضارة سأسباب اخذ (ḥaḍāra) to adopt modern civilization; بأسبابه اسبابه وصل (asbābahū) to join forces with s.o.; تقطعت بين األسباب relations between ... are broken out, they no longer have anything in common; المسرة أسباب شاطره šāṭarahū asbāba al-masarra to share s.o.’s joy
سببية sababīya causality
سباب sabbāb abuser, vituperator, reviler
سبابة sabbāba index finger
سبيب sabīb pl. سبائب sabā’ib  strand of hair
مسبة masabba pl. -āt vilification, abuse, insult
تسبيب tasbīb mediate causation (Isl.
Law)
سباب sibāb abuse, vituperation, revilement
مسابة musābba abuse, vituperation, revilement
مسبب musabbib causer, originator, author; مسببات musabbibāt causative factors
مسبب musabbab caused (عن by) │ السبب والمسبب(sabab) cause and effect
متسبب mutasabbib causer; cause; retailer, small storekeeper
سبا sabā and سبأ saba’ Sheba │ (ايادي) ايدي ذھبوا سبا d. aidiya (aydiya) sabā they were scattered to the four winds
سبانخ sabānak, sabānik spinach
سبايس see سباھى
سبايس sabāyis and سباھي sibāhī spahis, Algerian native cavalry in the French army
 سبت sabata u to rest; to keep the Sabbath IV to enter on the Sabbath 392
السبت as-sabt pl. السبوت as-sabūt Sabbath, Saturday │ السبت يومyaum as-s. do.; النور سبت s. an-nūr Holy Saturday (Chr.)
سبات subāt lethargy; slumber, sleep
 سباتي subātī lethargic │المخى الاللتھاب السباتي (mukkī) encephalitis lethargica, sleeping sickness (med.)
مسبت musbit lethargic, inactive, motionless
  سبتsabat pl. -āt, اسبتة asbita basket
 سبت sibitt dill (Anethum graveolens; bot.)
سبتمبر sibtambir September
سبج sabaj jet (min.)
سبح sabaḥa a (sabḥ, سبح sibāḥa) to swim (,في ب in); to float (fig.); to spread II to praise, glorify (ﷲ allāha, <I li-llāhi God, by saying ﷲ سبحان subḥāna llāh praise the Lord!); to praise, extol (ب s.th.) │بحمده سبح (ḥamdihī) to sing s.o.’s praise, glorify s.o.
سبحة sabḥa (n. un.) a swim, swimming
سبحة sabḥa pl. سبحات subuḥāt, سبح subaḥ beads of the Muslim rosary; Muslim rosary; supererogatory salat (Isl. Law)
سبحة subḥa, sabḥa pl. سبحات subuḥāt, sabaḥāt majesty (of God) │ ﷲ وجه سبحات subuḥātu wajhi llāh the sublimity, or the august splendor, or God’s countenance; رفيعة سبحات (sabaḥāt) lofty heights
ﷲ سبحان subḥāna llāh exclamation of surprise, etc. (prop.: praise the Lord! God be praised!); عن ﷲ سبحان God is far
above ..., God is beyond …
سباح sabbāḥ swimmer
سبوح sabūḥ a good swimmer; swift and smooth-running (lit.: floating; of horses)
سباحة sibāḥa (art of) swimming
masābiḥ  مسابح pl. masbaḥ مسبح
swimming pool
مسبحة misbaḥa pl. مسابح masābiḥ  rosary
تسبيح tasbīḥ pl. -āt, تسابيح tasābīḥ  glorification of God (by exclaiming سبحان ﷲ)
tasābīḥ  تسابيح -āt, pl. tasbīḥa تسبيحة
glorification of God; hymn, song of praise
تسبحة tasbiḥa hymn, song of praise
سبحاء subbāḥ, سباح -ūn, pl. sābiḥ سابح سابح في افكاره │ bather swimmer; subaḥā’  thought in lost
O سابحة sābiḥa glider, sailplane, cargo glider
sawābiḥ  سوابح and sābiḥāt سابحات
floating ones (epithet for race horses)
مسبحة musabbiḥa index finger
سبحلة sabḥala glorification of God
سبخ sabaka u (sabk) to be sound asleep II do.; to manure, fertilize (األرض al-arḍa the land)
سبخ sabak dung, manure, fertilizer │سبخ بلدي (baladī) manure
سبخ sabik briny (soil)
سبخة sabaka, sabka pl. سباخ sibāk salt marsh, salt swamp │ سبخ ارضdo.
سباخ sibāk pl. اسبخة asbika dung, manure, fertilizer │ بلدي سباخ (baladī) manure
سبيخ sabīk pl. سبائخ sabā’ik  loose (unspun) cotton
تسبيخ tasbīk deep, sound sleep; O coma, somnolence (med.)
سبر sabara u i (sabr) to examine with a probe, to probe (ھ a wound); to measure, sound (ھ s.th., e.g., the depth); to fathom, explore, examine (ھ s.th.) │ اغوار سبر
٣٩٣ الشيء to probe the depth of s.th., get to the bottom of s.th., study s.th. thoroughly
سبر sabr probing (of a wound); fathoming, exploration, examination
سبار sibār pl. سبر subūr probe (med.)
سبورة sabūra slate; blackboard
مسبر misbar pl. مسابر masābir  probe (med.)
مسبار misbār pl. مسابير masābīr  probe (med.)
سبس sibs small wind instrument resembling the oboe (eg.)
سبسب II tasabsaba to be lank (hair); to flow (tears)
سبسب sabsaba pl. سباسب sabāsib  desert, wasteland │ سبسب قفر (qafr) desert, wasteland, desolate region
سبط sabuṭa u (سبوطة subūṭa, سباطة sabāṭa) to be lank (hair)
 سبط sabiṭ, sabṭ, sabaṭ pl. سباط sibāṭ lank (hair) │اليدين سبط sabṭ (sabiṭ) al-yadain liberal, openhanded, generous; القامة سبط s. al-qāma shapely, well-built, of graceful stature
سبط sibṭ pl. اسباط asbāṭ grandson; tribe (of the Israelites)
سباط sabbāṭ pl. سبابيط sabābīt shoe سباطة subāṭa bunch, cluster (of fruit) ساباط sābāṭ pl. سوابط sawābīṭ  arcade,
roofed lane or street; archway
سيباط sībāṭ and (eg.) سباط subāṭ arcade, roofed lane or street; archway
سبع II to make sevenfold (ھ s.th.); to divide into seven parts (ھ s.th.)
سبع sab‘ pl. اسبع asbu‘,سبوع subū‘, سبوعة subū‘a predatory animal, beast of prey; lion
سبع sabu‘ pl. سباع siba‘ predatory animal, beast of prey; lion
سبعة sab‘a (f. سبع sab‘) seven; عشر سبعة sab‘ata ‘ašara (f. عشرة سبع sab‘a ‘ašrata) seventeen
سبع sub‘, subu‘ pl. اسباع asbā‘ one- seventh
سباعي subā‘ī consisting of seven parts; seven-lettered, consisting of seven letters
سبعون sab‘ūn seventy
سبعوني sab‘ūnī septuagenarian
as-sab‘īnīya at-tajyama الترجمة السبعينية
the Septuagint
السبوعات (Hebr. š bū‘ōt) as-sabū‘āt Shabuoth, the Feast of Weeks, or Pentecost, of the Jews
│ week asābī‘  اسابيع pl. usbū‘ اسبوع (Chr.) Week Passion اسبوع اآلالم
اسبوعي usbū‘ī weekly; اسبوعيا weekly, by the week
اسبوعية usbū‘īya weekly feature (radio)
السابع as-sābi‘ the seventh
سبغ sabaga u a (سبغ subūg) to be long and wide; to abound, be abundant IV to make wide, widen (ھ s.th.); to make (ھ s.th.) complete; to bestow amply (على upon s.o., ھ s.th.), shower (على ھ s.o. with); to lend,
impart liberally (على ھ to s.th. s.th.); to attribute, ascribe (على to s.o., ھ qualities)
│ الوضوء اسبغ to perform the ritual ablution properly (Isl. Law)
سابغ sābig pl. سوابغ sawābig  long and loose-fitting (garment); full, complete, perfect; excessive, abundant, ample
سبق sabaqa i u (sabq) to be, come, go, get, or act, before or ahead of s.o. or s.th. (ه ھ،), precede, antecede (ه ھ، s.o., s.th., in place and time), arrive before s.o. (ه) at (الى); to outstrip, outdistance, leave behind (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to forestall (ھ s.th.); to anticipate (o s.th.); to do 394 or say s.th. ( الى) spontaneously before one can be stopped; to turn spontaneously, instinctively, without knowing why (الى to s.th.); to surpass, beat (على or ه s.o.) │سبق فعله ان له (an fa‘alahū) he had already done it before; قابله ان له سبق (an qābalahū) he had met him before (paraphrasing the pluperfect); ان القول لنا سبق (qaulu) we have previously (already) said that ...; الحكم سبق ب عليه (ḥukmu) he had been previously sentenced to …; لي سبق it happened to me before, I experienced before (ان that); لم
ان لي يسبق I have never before ...; له يسبق لم مثيل (as) there has never been one before, (which is) unprecedented; العذل السيف سبق s. s-saifu l-‘adla (the sword anticipated censure, i.e.) one has to accept the accomplished fact, there is (was) nothing one can (could) do about it, it is (was) already too late; لسانه سبقه (lisānuhū) to burst out impulsively (with an utterance) II to cause (ھ s.th.) to precede or antecede; to premise (ھ s.th.); to do or give (ھ s.th.) prematurely III to try to get ahead of s.o. (ه); to try to defeat or beat (ه s.o.), seek to get the better of s.o. (ه); to race (ه s.o.), run a race (ه with s.o.); to compete, vie (ه with s.o.) VI to try to get ahead of one another, seek to outdo one another. compete, vie; to try to beat one another (الى to ) VIII = VI
سبق sabaq antecedence; precedence, priority │ اإلصرار سبق s. al-isrār premeditation, willfulness (jur.); السبق ميزة mīzat as-s. initiative; السبق قصد احرز see احرز
سبق sabaq pl. اسباق asbāq stake (in a race)
 سبق sabqa: القلم سبقة s. al-qalam slip of the pen, lapsus calami
سبقة subqa stake (in a race)
سباق sabbāq anticipatory; precursory; triumphant │ سباق قطار fast train, express train; -- (pl. -ūn) precursor; winner in contest; O race-car driver
اسبق asbaq  earlier, antecedent; preceding, previous, prior; former, ex- │ األسبق المقيم (muqīm) the ex-resident
اسبقية asbaqīya precedence, priority; seniority
سبق sibāq race (esp. of horses); contest
m 4X100 tatābu‘) (s. سباق تتابع ٤×٠٠١ متر│ حلبة horse; race حصان السباق race; relay race as-s. (maidān) ḥalbat )ميدان( السبق سباق race; boat regatta, سباق القوارب track; race arms at-tasalluḥ s. التسلح
مسابقة musābaqa pl. -āt race (esp. of horses); contest; competition; emulation
تسابق tasābuq emulation; competition
سابق sābiq pl. -ūn, سباق subbāq antecedent, preceding, foregoing, previous, prior; former, ex-; retired, ret.; سابقا sābiqan formerly, previously │سابق ألوانه (li-awānihī) premature; السابق في formerly, at one time, once; كالسابق as before; العادة كسابق as it was customary before; as usual; صرفه السابق المبلغ (mablag, ṣarfuhū) the payment already effected
سابقة sābiqa precedence, priority; previous case, precedent; previous, earlier publication of an author; pl. سوابق sawābiq  antecedents; previous convictions │السوابق (ذوي or) اصحاب من previously convicted; سوابق له من (man) (one) previously convicted; recidivous criminal
al-qaṣd s. سابقية القصد sābiqīya: سابقية
premeditation (jur.)
مسبوق غير gair masbūq unprecedented
مسبقا musabbaqan prematurely, in advance
مسابق musābiq pl. -ūn competitor; contestant; racer, runner
متسابق mvla.tdbiq competitor; contestant
سبك sabaka i u (sabk) to found, cast (ھ metal), smelt (ھ ore); to form, shape, mold (ه s.o.); to formulate (ھ s.th.); to polish the style (ھ of s.th.) II to found, cast (ھ metal), smelt (ھ ore); to braise, stew (ھ s.th.) VII to be poured into a mold, be cast
سبك sabk founding, outing; cast (also fig., = arrangement); formulation (of an expression); shaping, forming (of a person) │المعادن سبك صناعة metallurgic industry; ودقة سبك (diqqa) accuracy, precision
سباك sabbāk smelter, founder
سباكة sibāka founder’s trade and activity
سبيكة sabīka pl. سبائك sabā’ik  ingot
مسبك masbak pl. مسابك masābik  foundry
تسبيك tasbīk stewing, braising (in a covered dish, with scant moisture)
سبل II to dedicate to charitable purposes (ھ s.th.) IV to let (ھ s.th.) hang down; to let fall, drop (ھ a curtain, drape, etc. على over); to close, shut (على the eyes); to shed (على tears); to ear, form ears
سبل sabal (coll.; n. un. ة) ears (of cereals)
سبلة sabla manure, dung
سبلة sabala pl. سبال sibāl mustache
سبيل sabīl m. and f., pl. سبل subul, اسبلة asbila way, road, path; access; means, expedient, possibility (الى to, for; -- pl. اسبلة asbila) public fountain); -- pl. سبالن siblān) clay pipe bowl, clay pipe (of the Bedouins) │السبيل ابن ibn as-s. vagabond, tramp; wayfarer, traveler; سبيل في for the sake of, for, in behalf of, in the interest of; بسبيل or سبيل عن by means of, through, by; ﷲ سبيل في for the cause of God, in behalf of God and his religion; سبيل علي by way of, for: e.g., التجربة سبيل على (tajriba) for a try, tentatively, الفكاھة سبيل على (fukāha) for fun, المثال سبيل على الشيء ذكر to quote s.th.
as an example; سبيله خلى see به ضاقت خلو؛ السبل he was at his wit’s end; ذلك في علي ليس سبيل (laisa ‘alayya) there is nothing to keep me from doing that, I am free to do that, it is no sin if I do that
سابل sābil: سابلة طريق a public, much- frequented road
 السابلة as-sābila the passers-by
مسبول masbūl lowered, down (curtain)
alphabetically up look األسبان، اسباني
سبنسة (eg.) sibinsa pl. -āt caboose, brake van; baggage car (railroad)
سبه sabah dotage
مسبوه عقل ‘aql masbūh impaired mind (esp. due to old age), feeble-mindedness
سبھلال sabahlalan indifferently, aimlessly, haphazardly, at random
سباھلة sabāhila people without work, idlers, loafers
سباھى look up alphabetically سبا look up alphabetically سبور (Fr. sport) sbōr sport(s)
سبى sabā i (saby, سباء sibā’) to take prisoner, capture; to lead into captivity (esp. in war); to captivate, fascinate, enchant, charm, beguile, intrigue (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.)
VIII = I
سبي saby capture; captivity
سبي sabīy pl. سبايا sabāyā captive, prisoner( of war)
سبية sabīya (female) prisoner سبيداج sibīdāj white lead, ceruse سبيذاج sibīdāj white lead, ceruse
ت س abbreviation of تجاري سجل sijill tijārī
commercial register
است buttocks, backside 396
 ستة sitta (f. ست sitt) six; عشر ستة sittata ‘ašara
(f. عشرة ست sitta ‘ašrata) sixteen
ستون sittūn sixty
ستونى sittūnī sexagenarian
السات as-sātt the sixth
  □ست sitt pl. -āt lady │الحسن ست s. al-ḥusn a variety of morning-glory (Ipomoea cairica Webb.; bot.); also = belladonna, deadly nightshade (bot.)
استاذ pl. اساتذة look up alphabetically
ستر satara u i (satr) to cover, veil (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to hide, conceal (ه ھ، s.o., s.th., عن from); to disguise (ھ عن s.th. from s.o.); to
shield, guard, protect (ه s.o., ھ s.th., عن
against or from); to forgive (على ھ s.o
.s.th.), overlook, condone s.th. (ھ) done by s.o. (على) II = I; V to be covered, be veiled; to cover o.s., hide o.s., be concealed (على from) VIII to cover o.s., hide o.s.; to be veiled, be hidden, be concealed (على from)
ستر sitr pl. ستور sutūr, استار astār veil; screen; curtain, drape, window curtain; covering; cover (also mil.); protection, shelter, guard, shield; pretext, excuse
سترة sutra pl. ستر sutar jacket; tunic ستري sutarī (eg.) clown, buffoon ستار sitār pl. ستر sutur veil, screen;
covering; curtain, drape; pretext, excuse │ الحديدي الستار the Iron Curtain (pol.); الستار الفضي (fiḍḍī) motion-picture screen; من ستار النيران) النار) barrage (mil.); عن الستار رفع الشيء to disclose, unveils, s.th. (also a monument); الستار وراء من behind the scenes, backstage (fig.)
الستار as-sattār the Veiler, the Coverer (attribute of God)
ستارة sitāra pl. ستائر satā’ir  veil; screen; curtain, drape, window curtain; cover, covering
تستر tasattur cover (mil.)
O ساتر sātir screen, folding screen
مستور mastūr hidden, invisible; masked; chaste; (one) having a blameless record (Isl. Law); pl. مساتير masātīr  hidden, secret things
متستر mutasattir O anonymous
مستتر mustatir hidden, concealed, latent; understood, implied (pronoun)
ستف II to stack up, store up, stow (ھ goods); to arrange
تستيف tastīf stacking, stowing, storage
سته sath, sith, satah pl. استاه astāh buttocks, backside
سجاير sagā’ir , سجائر -āt, pl. sigāra سجارة
sagāyir  (Eg. spelling) cigarette
اسجح asjaḥ  f. سجحاء sajḥā’  well- shaped, shapely, beautiful
 سجد sajadah u (سجود sujūd) to bow down, bow in worship; to throw o.s. down, prostrate
o.s. (ل before); to worship (<I God)
سجدة sajda pl. sajadāt prostration in prayer │ السجدة احد aḥa as-s. Whitsunday (Chr.)
سجود sujūd prostration, adoration, warship; also pl. of ساجد sājid (see below)
سجاد sajjād pl. -ūn worshiper (of God)
سجادة sajjāda, coll. سجاد sajjād pl. سجاجيد sajājīd  prayer rug; rug, carpet │ صاحب السجادة and السجادة شيخ title of the leaders of certain dervish orders in their capacity of inheritors of the founder’s prayer rug
مسجد masjid pl. مساجد masājid  mosque
│ جامع مسجد (jāmi‘) large mosque, mosque where the Friday prayer is conducted; الحرام المسجد (ḥarām) the Holy Mosque in Mecca; األقصى المسجد (aqṣā) name of a mosque on Jerusalem’s Temple Square; 397 المسجدان the two Mosques (of Mecca and Medina)
sujūd سجود sujjad, سجد pl. sājid ساجد
prostrate in adoration, worshiping
  سجر sajara u to fire up, heat (ھ a stove, an oven, etc.) II to cause to overflow (ھ water)
مسجر musajjar long and flowing (of hair)
  سجارة look up alphabetically
سجس II to upset (ه s.o.)
سجع saja‘a a (saj‘) to coo (pigeon); to speak in rhymed prose II to speak in rhymed prose
سجع rhymed prose
سجعة saj‘a a passage of rhymed prose
ساجع composer of rhymed prose
sujūf سجوف asjāf, اسجاف pl. sijf sajf, سجف
curtain, veil
سجاف sijāf pl. سجف sujuf curtain, veil
سجق (Turk. sucuk) sujuq sausage │محمر سجق
(muḥammar) fried, or grilled, sausage
سجل II to register, enter (ھ s.th.), make an entry (ھ of s.th.); to note down, record (ھ s.th.), make a note of (ھ); to have (ھ s.th.) recorded, put (ھ s.th.) on record, make a
deposition or statement for the official records; to document, prove by documentary evidence (ھ s.th.); to give evidence (ھ or s.th.); to score (ھ s.th., e.g., اصابة a hit); to put down, write down, book (ھ على s.th. to s.o.’s debit); to record (ھ s.th., said of an apparatus; also, e.g., في المسجلة الشرائط on tape); to capture, catch (ھ a scene); to set (ھ a record; athlet.); to register (ھ a letter); to enter (ھ s.th.) in the commercial register; to have (ھ an invention) patented, secure a patent (ھ on)
│ ان نفسه على سجلto go on record for (doing or being s.th.) III to rival, contend; to dispute, debate (ه with s.o.); to contest (ه s.o.’s right ھ to s.th.) │الحديث ساجله (ḥadīta) to draw s.o. into a conversation, have a talk with s.o.
سجل sijill pl. -āt scroll; register; list, index; سجالت records, archives │السجل التجاري (tijārī) commercial register; السجل الذھبي (dahabī) Golden Book; الزيارات سجل visitors’ book, guest book; التشريفات سجل list of visitors (dipl.); or األطيان سجل سجالت ) or) cadastre, land register; السجل العقاري (‘aqārī) do.
تسجيل tasjīl pl. -āt entering, entry, registration; documentation; authentication; booking; recording; tape- recording; registering (of mail) │تسجيل عقاري (‘aqārī) entry in the land register; آلة الصوت تسجيل (t. aṣ-ṣaut) tape recorder
سجال sijāl contest, competition with alternate success │سجاال بينھم الحرب كانت (ḥarb) their battle had its ups and downs, they fought each other with alternate success
مساجلة musājala pl. -āt contest, competition; discussion, talk
مسجل musajjil pl. -ūn registrar; notary public; (pl. -āt) tape recorder │مسجل شريط pl. مسجلة شرائط magnetic tape; الكلية مسجل
m. al-kullīya secretary of the faculty
مسجل musajjal registered, etc. (see II) │ مسجلة رسالة registered letter; مسجلة مراسالت (murāsalāt) registered mail; مسجلة اطنان register tons; مسجلة حفلة (ḥafla) concert of recorded music
سجم sajama u (سجوم sujūm, سجام sijām) to flow, stream, well forth (tears, water); -- sajama
 i (sajm, سجوم sujūm, سجمان sajamān) to pour forth (ھ water), shed (ھ tears) IV to shed (ھ tears) VII to flow, stream, well forth (water); to be fluent, elegant (speech); to be harmonious; to harmonize, be in keeping (مع with 398
انسجام insijām fluency; harmony; order
منسجم munsajim harmonious
سجن sajana u (sajn) to jail, imprison (ه s.o.) سجن sajn detention, imprisonment سجن sijn pl. سجون sujūn prison, jail سجين sajīn pl. سجناء sujanā’ , سجنى
sajnā imprisoned, jailed, captive; prisoner, prison inmate, convict
سجينة sajīna pl. -āt female prisoner سجان sajjān jailer, prison guard, warden مسجون masjūn pl. مساجين masājīn 
imprisoned, jailed, captive; prisoner, prison inmate, convict
سجو) سجا) sajā u (سجو sajw, سجو sujūw) to be calm, quiet, tranquil (night, sea) II to cover with a winding sheet, to shroud ( الميت al-mayyita the deceased) V to cover
o.s. (ھ with a garment)
سجية sajīya pl. -āt, سجايا sajāyā nature, natural disposition, temper, character; pl. characteristics, traits │ سجية عنof one’s own accord, spontaneously
ساج sājin quiet, calm, tranquil; dark (night)
مسجى musajjan covered with a winding sheet, shrouded (corpse); laid out (corpse)
سح saḥḥa u i (saḥḥ, سحوح suḥūḥ) to flow down, flow, fun, stream │ السماء سحت saḥḥat is-samā’ it rained cats and dogs
سحاحة عين ‘ain saḥḥāḥ tearful eye
سحب saḥaba a (saḥb) to trail on the ground, drag along (ھ s.th.); to withdraw (ه ھ، s,o., s.th., also, e.g., a measure, an order, etc.); to pull out (ھم troops, عن from); to take away (من ھ from s.o. s.th.), strip, dispossess, divest (من ھ s.o. of); to draw ( ھ water); to take out, withdraw (ھ money, from an account); to draw (ھ a bill of exchange, a lot); to unsheathe, draw (ھ a sword); to apply, make applicable (ھ على
s.th. to; said of a law or statute) │ سحب على به العمل(‘amala) to extend the applicability of s.th. to ... VII to drag o.s. along, struggle along; to retreat, withdraw, pull out, fall back (من from); to be drawn out; to be applied (على to; of a law or statute)
سحب saḥb withdrawal (of troops, of measures, of rights, of money from an account, etc.); (pl. سحوبات suhūbāt) drawing (in a lottery)
سحاب saḥāb (coll.) clouds
سحابة saḥāba (n. un.) pl. سحائب suḥub, سحائب saḥā’ib  cloud; (pl. -āt) umbrella (magr.); سحابة saḥābata during, in the course of │اليوم) النھار سحابة) saḥābata n- nahār (l-yaum) all day long; سحابة سرنا sirnā saḥābata yauminā we have bean traveling all day; قرون اربعة سحابة in the course of four centuries
سحابة suḥāba film on the eye
سحاب saḥḥāb (Syr., Pal.) zipper, slide fastener
al-hawā’ m. مسحب الھواء maṣḥab: مسحب
source of the breeze or draft; draft (of air)
انسحاب insiḥāb withdrawal, retreat, pulling out, evacuation (esp. mil.); resignation; stretching, extension
ساحب sāḥib drawer (of a bill of exchange)
عليه المسحوب al-masḥūb ‘alaihi drawee (of a bill of exchange)
سحت suḥt, suḥut pl. اسحات asḥāt s.th. forbidden or banned; illegal possessions, ill-gotten property
سحتوت saḥtūt Eg. square measure of 0.304 m  (= 1/24 sahm); -- suḥtūt penny
سحج saḥaja a (saḥj) to scrape off, shave off, scratch off, rub off (ھ s.th.); to graze, abrade (ھ the skin), strip off (ھ s.th.) II to scrape off, abrade, strip off (ھ s.th.) 399
مسحج misḥaj pl. مساحج masāḥij  plane (tool)
masāḥij  مساحج pl. misḥaja مسحجة
planing machine, planer
مسحاج misḥāj pl. مساحيج masāḥij  plane (tool)
 مسحوج masḥūj raw, sore (like a skin abrasion)
سحر saḥara a (siḥr) to bewitch, charm, enchant, infatuate, fascinate (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to wheedle, coax (ه s.o.) II = I; V to have a light meal (shortly before daybreak)
سحر saḥar, suḥr pl. سحور suḥūr, اسحار asḥār lungs, pulmonary region of the body
سحر siḥr bewitchment, beguilement, enchantment, fascination; -- (pl. اسحار asḥār, سحور suḥūr) sorcery, witchcraft, magic; charm (of a woman)
فانوس سحري │ magic(al) siḥrī سحري
(fānūs) magic lantern, slide projector
سحر saḥar pl. اسحار asḥār time before daybreak, early morning, dawn
سحور saḥūr last meal before daybreak during the month of Ramadan
سحار saḥḥār pl. -ūn sorcerer, magician, wizard, charmer
سحارة saḥḥāra sorceress, witch
سحارة saḥḥāra pl. -āt culvert; (pl.
سحاحير (saḥāhīr ) case, crate, chest, box
مساحر masāḥir : مساحره انتفخت (intafakat) his lungs became inflated (out of fear or pride)
ساحر sāḥir charming, enchanting; (pl.
-ūn, سحرة saḥara, سحار suḥḥār) sorcerer, enchanter, magician, wizard, charmer
ساحرة sāḥira pl. -āt, سواحر sawāḥir 
sorceress, witch
سحق saḥaqa a (saḥq) to crush (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to pound, bruise, powder, pulverize (ھ s.th.); to annihilate, wipe out (ھ s.th., e.g., an army); to wear out (ھ clothing); -- saḥiqa a, saḥuqa u (suḥq) to be distant, far away, remote II to crush; to annihilate, destroy V and VII to be crushed, be pounded, be bruised, be pulverized
سحق saḥq crushing, bruising, pulverization; (pl. سحوق suhūq) worn garment, rag
سحق suḥq, suḥuq distance, remoteness; depth, vastness (of an abyss) │له سحقا
suḥqan lahū away with him! to hell with him!
سحيق saḥīq far away, distant, remote; deep, bottomless (abyss, depth)
siḥāq سحاق and musāḥaqa مساحقة
tribady, Lesbianism
القلب انسحاق insiḥāq al-qalb contrition, penitence, repentance
ساحق sāḥiq crushing; overwhelming (majority)
مسحوق masḥūq ground, grated (bread, nutmeg, etc.); (pl. مساحق masāḥiq ) powder │ الفحم مسحوق m. al-faḥm coal dust
القلب منسحق m. al-qalb contrite, penitent, repentant
سحل saḥala a (saḥl) to scrape off, shave off, peel (ھ s.th.); to smooth, make smooth (ھ s.th.); to plane (ھ s.th.); to file (ھ s.th.)
سحالة saḥāla filings, file dust
سحلية siḥlīya pl. saḥālin lizard (eg.)
مسحل misḥa1 pl. مساحل masāḥil  tool for smoothing, plane; file
ساحل sāḥil pl. سواحل sawāḥil  littoral, coast, seashore; (Eg.) river harbor, anchorage (on the Nile) │السواحل حفر kafar as-s. coast guard; له ساحل ال (sāḥila) shoreless
ساحلي sāḥilī coastal, littoral; (pl. سواحلة
sawāḥila) coastal inhabitant; Swahili 400
سحلب saḥlab salep (dried tuber of various species of Orchis); a sweet drink made of salep
سحم saḥam blackness, black color
سحمة suḥma blackness, black color سحام suḥām blackness black color اسحم asḥam , f. سحماء saḥmā’ , pl. سحم
suḥum black
سحن saḥana a (saḥn) to crush, pound, bruise, grind (ھ s.th.); to smooth by rubbing (ھ s.th.)
سحنة saḥna and saḥana pl. saḥanāt, سحن suḥan (external) appearance, look(s); facial expression, air, mien
masāḥin  مساحن pl. misḥana مسحنة
pestle
 سحاءة siḥā’a pl. سحايا saḥāyā cerebral membrane, cortex
مرض االلتھاب│ meningeal siḥā’ī سحائي meningitis al-ilt.) (maraḍ السحائي
مسحاة misḥāh pl. مساح masāḥin iron shovel, spade
سختيان suktiyān, siktiyān morocco (leather)
سخر sakira a (sakar, sakr, sukur, sukr, سخرة sukra, مسخر maskar) to laugh, scoff, jeer, sneer (من or ب at), mock, ridicule, deride ( من or ب s.o., s.th.), make fun (من or ب of) II to subject, make subservient (ه s.o., ھ s.th., ل to or for the purpose of); to make serviceable (ھ ل s.th. to), employ, utilize, turn to profitable account (ھ ل s.th. for), make use (ه ھ، of, ل for); to exploit (ه s.o., ھ s.th., ل for) V to reduce to servitude, subjugate (ه s.o.); to scoff, jeer, sneer
سخرة sukra laughingstock, target of ridicule; corvée, statute labor, forced labor
اعمال السخرة bondsmen; serfs, رجال السخرة │
forced labor, slave labor
سخري sukrī, sikrī laughingstock, target of ridicule; corvée, statute labor, forced labor
سخرية sukrīya scorn, derision, mockery, irony; laughingstock, object of ridicule
مسخرة maskara pl. -āt, مساخر masākir  object of ridicule, laughingstock; ridiculous, droll, ludicrous; masquerade
تسخير taskīr subjugation, subjection; exploitation
مسخر musakkir oppressor
سخط sakiṭa a (sakal) to be annoyed (على or ه ھ، at s.o., at s.th.), be displeased, be angry (ھ or ه with s.o.), resent (على or ھ s.th.) IV to discontent, embitter (ه s.o.); to anger, exasperate, enrage (ه s.o.) V = I
سخط sukut, sukṭ, sakat discontent, annoyance, displeasure, indignation, anger, irritation, exasperation; wrath, bitterness, grudge, resentment
masākiṭ  مساخط pl. maskaṭa مسخطة
object of annoyance, of wrath, of anger
مسخوط maskūt loathsome, hated, odious; (pl. مساخيط masākīṭ) (eg.) idol
تسخط tasaḳḳut annoyance, displeasure, anger, wrath






















سخف sakafa u (sukf, سخافة sakāfa) to be feeble (wit); to be stupid, foolish
سخف sakufa feeble-mindedness, dimwittedness; imbecility, idiocy; nonsense, foolishness, folly
سخيف sakīf pl. سخاف sikāf stupid, fatuous, simple-minded; absurd, silly, ridiculous, foolish; despicable, inferior; (pl. سخفاء sukafā’) fool
سخافة sakāfa feeble-mindedness dimwittedness; (pl. -āt) folly, silly thing to do, childish prank
سخائف sakā’if silly things 401
سخلة sakla pl. سخال sikāl lamb
سخم II to make black, blacken with soot, besmut (ھ s.th.) │ بصدره سخم(bi-ṣadrihī) to irritate s.o., make s.o. angry V to hate (على s.o.), harbor resentment (على against s.o.), be angry (على with)
سخم sakam blackness
سخمة sukma blackness; hatred, resentment, ill will
سخام sukam soot, smut
 سخيمة sakīma pl. سخائم sakā’im hatred, resentment, ill will
سخن sakuna u, sakana u and sakina a ( سخونة sukūna, سخانة sakāna, سخنة sukna) to be or become hot or warm; to warm (up); to be feverish II to make hot, to beat, warm (ھ s.th.) IV = II
سخن sukn hot, warm
سخانة sakāna heat, warmth
سخونة sukūna heat, warmth
miyāh s. سخان مياه sakkān, سخان O
boiler, hot-water tank
O سخانة sakkāna hot-water bottle │سخانة الحمام s. al-ḥammām bath heater, geyser
سخانات sakkānāt hot springs
warm hot, sukkān سخان pl. sākin ساخن سخاء( a sakiya سخي u, sakā سخي( سخا and سخو(
sakā’) and سخو sakuwa u (سخاوة sakāwa) to be liberal. generous (على ب with s.th. toward s.o.); to grant, award (ب s.th., على to s.o.), confer, bestow (ب s.th., على upon s.o.) V to show o.s. generous, display liberality; to endeavor to be liberal or generous VI = V
سخاء sakā’ liberality, munificence, generosity
سخي sakīy pl. اسخياء askiyā’ liberal, openhanded, generous; giving generously (ب s.th.), being lavish (ب with) │أموال سخية ample funds; الشيء عن النفس سخي (s. an- nafs) only too glad to relinquish or give up s.th.
سخاوة sakāwa generosity
سد sadda u (sadd) to plug up, close up, stop up (ھ s.th.); to clog, congest (ھ s.th.); to bar, obstruct, block up, barricade (ھ s.th., على ھ to s.o. s.th.); to block, blockade (ھ s.th.); to cork, plug, stopper (ھ s.th.); to pay, defray, settle, cover (ھ s.th., esp. expenses, a debt, etc.); to fulfill, satisfy, meet (ھ a claim, and the like) │ سد ثغرة(tugratan) to fill a gap, close a breach; ثلمة سد (tulmatan) to fill a gap; خلة سد (kallatan) to remedy a shortcoming; سد حاجته (ḥājatahū) to meet s.o.’s need, provide for s.o.; رمقه سد (ramaqahū) to keep s.o. or o.s. barely alive, eke out an existence; to provide s.o. with a bare
existences; to allay s.o.’s hunger; مسده سد (masaddahū) to fill s.o.’s place, replace s.o.; مطاعمه سد to satisfy or fulfill s.o.’s claims;  فراغا سد (farāgan) to fill a gap; سد النواقص to remove or remedy deficiencies;
-- sadda i (سدود sudūd, سداد sadād) to be sound, right, in proper condition; to hit the right thing, say or do the right thing; to be apposite, be to the point II to block, bar, obstruct (ھ s.th.); to pay, defray, settle, cover (ھ expenses, debts, etc.); to guide ( نحو s.o. to), show (ه s.o.) the right way (نحو to); to direct (الى ھ s.th. to), point, level (ھ الى s.th. at); to aim (الى at); to sight, take aim by a sight; to focus (الى on; phot.); to draw a bead (الى or نحو on s.th.) │ سدد دينا(dainan) to pay or settle a debt; عجزا سدد (‘ajzan) to cover a deficit; خطاه سدد (kuṭāhu) to guide s.o.’s stepa IV to hit the right thing, say or do the right thing; to be apposite, be to the point V to be guided, be directed, be shown (الى to) VII to be blocked, be obstructed, be plugged up, become or be clogged or congested 402
سد sadd plugging, closing, stopping up; obstruction, barring, barricading; blocking; defrayment (of costs), payment, settlement (of a debt, of expenses); fulfillment, satisfaction (of a claim, etc.);
-- sadd, sudd pl. سدود sudūd, اسداد asdād obstruction, block, obstacle; barrier; rampart, bank, mound; dike; dam; weir; barrage, river dam; bar, rail; hurdle (athlet.); bulwark (fig.) │العالى السد (‘ālī) the High Dam (near Aswān); المناطيد سد balloon barrage (mil.); السد حارة blind alley, dead end
سدة sadda block, barrier; obstruction, obstacle; barricade; dam │الشريانية السدة (širyānīya) embolism (med.)
سدة sudda pl. سدد sudad gate, door; threshold; seat; couch. divan │الرسولية السدة الباباوية)) (rasūlīya) the Holy See
سدد sadad obstruction, clogging (of a pipe)
سداد sadād payment, defrayment, settlement, discharge, liquidation; the proper, right thing to do, the apposite thing to say; appropriateness, appositeness (of a remark), lucky hand (in one’s actions) │السداد تحت outstanding, due,
 unpaid (com.); بسداد appropriately, appositely; الرأي سداد s. ar-ra’y levelheadedness
سداد sudād obstruction in the nose
سداد sidād pl. اسدة asidda plug, stopper, cork │O التوصيل سداد plug (el.)
سدادة sidāda plug, stopper, cork; O sight (of a gun)
سديد sadīd hitting the target (arrow, spear); apposite, pat, pertinent, relevant, right, correct (answer, view)
اسد asadd  more apposite, more relevant
تسديد tasdīd payment, defrayment, settlement, discharge, liquidation │تحت التسديد outstanding, due, unpaid (com.)
ساد sādd obstructive
مسدود masdūd closed (circuit; el.)
□ سدب(eg.; sadab) = سذاب sadāb
سدر sadira a (sadar, سدارة sadāra) to be dazzled (eye); to be confused, bewildered, startled, dazed; to be deluded
سدر sidr (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. سدر sidar,
-āt, سدور sudūr a variety of Christ’s-thorn (Zizyphus spina Christi; bot.); lotus tree │ المنتھى سدرةs. al-muntahā the lotus tree in the Seventh Heaven; المنتھى سدرة بلغ to attain the highest goal, achieve ultimate results
سدارة sidāra pl. سدائر sadā’ir an Iraqi headgear, commonly of black velvet; overseas cap
sidāra سدارة = -āt pl. sīdāra سيدارة
سادر sādir reckless (في in s.th.)
سدس II to make sixfold (ھ s.th.); to multiply by six (ھ s.th.); to make hexagonal, make hexangular (ھ s.th.)
سدس suds, sudus pl. اسداس asdās one- sixth
سداسي sudāsī sixfold; consisting of six parts
السادس as-sādis the sixth
مسدس muaaddas hexagonal; hexagon; hexahedral; hexahedron; (pl. -āt) revolver, sixshooter │ اشارة مسدس m. išāra Very pistol
مسدسة musaddasa pistol, gun, revolver
سدف sadaf pl. اسداف asdāf darkness, twilight, dusk
سدف sudfa pl. سدف sudaf darkness, twilight, dusk; curtain
سدل sadala u i (sadl) to let (ھ s.th.) hang down or fall down; to let down, drop, lower (على s.th. on); pass. sudila to hang down (على on) II and IV = I; V to 403 hang down, be lowered, be down VII to descend (على on)
asdāl اسدال sudūl, سدول pl. sudl sidl, سدل
veil, curtain
سدم VII to dry up (spring)
سدم sadam sorrow, sadness, affliction, grief
سديم sadīm pl. سدم sudum mist, haze; nebula (astron.)
سديمي sadīmī nebular; nebulous
سدانة sidāna office of gatekeeper or custodian (of a shrine, specif. of the Kaaba)
سادن sādin pl. سدنة sadana custodian, gatekeeper of the Kaaba; sexton, sacristan (Chr.); keeper, curator; pl. سدنة crew (of a machine gun, of a tank, etc.)
(سدو and سدى) II to confer (ھ الى a benefit on s.o.) IV to confer (ل or ھ الى a benefit on s.o.); to render, perform, do (ھ s.th.) │ خدمة اليه اسدى (kidma) to render s.o. a service; االرشادات اليه اسدى (iršādāt) to make suggestions to s.o., advise s.o.; اليه اسدى الشكر (šukr) to extend one’s thanks to s.o., thank s.o.; فائدة اسدى to be beneficial; اسدى النصح (له) اليه (nuṣḥ) to give s.o. (a word of) advice; يدا اليه اسدى (yadan) to do s.o. a favor
سدى sadan pl. اسدية asdiya warp (of a fabric); a continuous, prevailing characteristic or trait, thread (of a story, of an argument, etc.)
سداة sadāh warp (of a fabric); a continuous, prevailing characteristic or trait, thread (of a story, of an argument, etc.)
سدى sudan in vain, futilely, to no end, uselessly │ سدى ذھبto be in vain, futile, useless
 سذاب sadāb rue, herb of grace (bot.)
سذبي sadabī of the rue
سذاجة sadāja simplicity; innocence, ingenuousness, naiveté; homeliness, plainness; guilelessness
ساذج sādaj, sādij pl. سذج suddaj simple; plain, uncolored, uniform (fabric); innocent, ingenuous, naive; plain, homely; artless, guileless, candid, frank (character); primitive
 سر (Pers. sar head) formerly in compounds: head, chief; سردار sirdār (Eg.) supreme commander; commanding general; سرعسكر sar‘askar general (in the former Ottoman army); سريوران saryawarān adjutant general
 سر sarra u (سرور surūr, تسرة tasirra, مسرة masarra) to make happy, gladden, delight, cheer (ه s.o.); pass. surra (سرور surūr) to be happy, glad, delighted (ل or من or ب at), take pleasure (ل or من or ب in) II to make happy, gladden, delight, cheer (ه s.o.) III to confide a secret (ه to s.o.) │ اذنه في ساره (udnihī) to whisper in s.o.’s ear IV to make happy, gladden, delight, cheer (ه s.o.); to keep secret, hide, conceal, disguise (ھ s.th.); to tell confidentially, confide (ب or الى ھ to s.o. s.th.); to tell under one’s breath, whisper (ب or الى ھ to
s.o. s.th.) │ اذنه في اسر (udnihī) to whisper in s.o.’s ear (ھ s.th.) V تسرى tasarrā (and تسرر tasarrara) to take (ب or ھا a woman) as concubine (سرية surriya) X to try to hide; to hide, be hidden (عن from); to take as concubine (ھا a woman)
سر sirr pl. اسرار asrār secret; secret thought; heart, inmost; secrecy; mystery; sacrament (Chr.); underlying reason (of s.th.); سرا sirran secretly, privately │ سرا وعالنية (‘alāniyatan) secretly and publicly; الليل سر s. al-lail watchword, password; القرآن اسرار the secret meaning of the Koran; السر كاتب secretary; السر كاتم do.; كلمة السر kalimat as-s. watchword, password; بسركم or سركم في to your 404 health! cheerio! skoal! سره في secretly,
Inwardly, in his heart; سره اتعب at‘aba sirrahū to trouble, worry, bother, harass s.o.; سرا اجرى ajrā sirran to dispense a sacrament (Chr.); سره ﷲ قدس qaddasa
llāhu sirrahū may God hallow his secret! (eulogy after the name of a deceased Muslim saint)
سري sirrī secret; private; confidential; mysterious, cryptic; sacramental (Chr.) │ السرية األمراض venereal diseases
سرية sirrīya secret; sportiveness
سر surr pl. اسرة asirra umbilical cord
سرة surra pl. -āt, سرر surar navel, umbilicus; center
سري surrī umbilical │ السري الحبل (ḥabl) umbilical cord
سرر surur, sirar umbilical cord
سرر surur line of the palm or forehead
سرار sarār: الشھر سرار s. aš-šahr last night of the lunar month
سرار sirār pl. اسرة asirra, اسارير asārīr  line of the palm or forehead; pl. features, facial expression, air, also الوجه اسارير a. al-wajh
سرور surūr joy, happiness, delight, pleasure; glee, gaiety, hilarity, mirth
سرير sarīr pl. اسرة asirra, سرور surūr, سراير sarāyīr  bedstead, bed; throne, elevated seat
سريرة sarīra pl. سرائر sarā’ir  secret; secret thought; mind, heart, soul │صفاء السريرة ṣafā’ as-s. clearness of conscience; السريرة طيب ṭayyib as-s. guileless simplehearted
سراء sarrā’  happiness prosperity │في والضراء السراء (ḍarrā’) in good and bad days, for better or for worse
sarārīy سراري pl. surriya سرية
concubine
مسرة masarra pl. -āt joy, happiness, delight, pleasure; glee, gaiety, hilarity, mirth
مسرة misarra pl. مسار masārr  speaking tube; telephone
تسر tasarrin concubinage
استسرار istisrār concubinage
سار sārr gladdening, gratifying, joyous, glad, cheering, delightful
 مسرور masrūr glad, happy, delighted (ب at), pleased (ب with)
مسر musirr gratifying, delightful, pleasant
مستسر mustasarr place of concealment
سرادق surādiq pl. -āt large tent, canopy, pavilion
سراط sirāṭ = صراط ṣirāṭ way, path, road
سراى sarāy palace
سراية sarāya pl. -āt palace │ السراية الصفراء (ṣafrā’) insane asylum (eg.)
 سرب sariba a (sarab) to flow; to run out, leak II to send in groups or batches (ه ھ، s.o., s.th., الى to) V to flow; to run out, flow off, escape; to sneak away, slink away, steal away; to stream, penetrate (الى into), infiltrate (الى s.th.); to creep (في into); to sneak, slip, steal (الى into, among); to creep along, flow along, glide along; to seep through, leak out (الى to, of a report); to spread, circulate, be passed around (news) VII to hide, crawl into its lair (animal)
سرب sirb pl. اسراب asrāb herd, flock, bevy, covey, swarm; squadron, group, wing, formation, flight (of aircraft); heart, mind │النحل من سرب (nahl) swarm of bees; السرب ھادئ calm, composed, confident
سرب sarab pl. اسراب asrāb burrow, hole, den, lair (of an animal); underground passage; tunnel, conduit 405
سربة surba pl. سرب surab herd, flock, bevy, covey, swarm
سراب sarāb mirage, fata morgana; phantom; sewage
مسرب masrab pl. مسارب masārib  course (taken by s.th.); river bed; drain, sewer
سارب sārib conspicuous, visible
ساربة sāriba pl. سوارب sawārib  reptile
 اسرب look up alphabetically
سربل sarbala to clothe (ه s.o.) with a sirbāl (q.v.); to clothe, dress (ه ب s.o. in or with); to cover, wrap (ھ s.th., ب with) II tasarbala to put on a sirbāl (q.v.); to put on, wear (ھ a garment); to be clothed,
clad, garbed (ب in, also fig.); to wrap o.s. (
ب in); to dress up (ب in)
سربال sirbāl pl. سرابيل sarābīl  shirt; coat of mail; garment
متسربل mutasarbil: بالشباب متسربل blessed with youthfulness, evincing youthful freshness
 سرج saraja to braid, plait (.ھ the hair) II do.; to baste, tack (ھ s.th.); to saddle, (ھ an animal) IV do.; to light (السراج the lamp)
سرج sarj pl. سروج surūj; saddle
سراج sirāj pl. سرج suruj lamp, light │O الحركة سراج s. al-ḥaraka traffic light; سراج الليل s. al-lail firefly, glowworm
سراجة sirāja saddlery, saddler’s trade; glanders
سراج sarrāj saddler
سروجي surūjī saddler
سروجية surūjīya saddlery, saddler’s trade
اسروجة usrūja lie, falsehood
مسرجة masraja pl. مسارج masārij  lamp; lampstand
  سيرجlook up alphabetically
 سرجين sirjīn dung, manure
سرح saraḥa a (سروح surūḥ) to move away, go away, leave; to roam freely; to graze freely (cattle); to be distracted (mind); -- sariḥa a to proceed freely, at will, without restraint │ ومرح سرح (mariḥa) to do as one likes II to send (ھ cattle) to pasture; to send, dispatch (ه s.o.); to let go (ه s.o.); to dismiss (ھا a woman by divorce); to grant (ه s.o.) leave, dismiss (ه s.o.); to release from an office, discharge, fire (ه s.o.); to release, set free (ه s.o.); to let (ھ the eyes) wander; to demobilize, disband (ھ an army); to dispel s.o.’s (عن) worries (also غمومه سرح); to comb (ھ the hair) │سرح شعره (ša‘rahū) to comb one’s hair, do one’s hair; نظره سرح (naẓarahū) to set one’s eyes on (الى) VII يفكر انسرح (yufakkiru) to be deep in thought, be absent-minded, allow one’s thoughts to wander
سراح sarāh dismissal (of a woman by divorce); release │سرح اطلق aṭlaqa
 sarāḥahū to release s.o., set s.o. free, set
s.o. at liberty; سراحه اطالق iṭlāq s. his release; السراح مطلق muṭlaq as-s. free, at large
hawker, بائع سارح and sarīḥ سريح peddler
سرحان sirḥān wolf
مسرح masraḥ pl. مسارح masāriḥ  pasture; stage, theater; scene │ التمثيل مسرح theater
مسرحي masraḥī dramatic, theatrical, stage (adj.)
مسرحية masraḥīya pl. -āt (stage) play
تسريح  tasrīḥ dismissal; discharge; release; demobilization; (pl. تساريح tasārīḥ ) permission, authorization
تسريحة tasrīḥa pl. -āt hairdo, coiffure
سارح sāriḥ: مارح سارح grazing freely, roaming freely; free and unrestrained; الفكر سارح sāriḥ al-fikr distracted, absentminded 406
منسرح munsariḥ: المنسرح name of a poetic meter │الفكر منسرح m. al-fikr distracted, absent-minded
rocket sawārīk  سواريخ pl. sārūk ساروخ
سرد sarada u (sard) to pierce, perforate (ھ s.th.); to carry on, continue (ھ s.th., e.g., a conversation); to tell off one after another, enumerate (ھ facts, events); to present, quote, detail, set forth neatly (ھ s.th.) II to pierce, perforate (ھ s.th.)
سرد sard enumeration; mentioning, quoting; neat, detailed presentation; recital, presentation, rendition (of an account, of a narrative, etc.); coherent, logical
سريدة sarīda: المولد سريدة s. al-maulid discourse dealing with the birth of the Prophet (during celebration of Mohammed’s birthday; tun.)
O مسرد masrad index (of a book)
سرداب sirdāb pl. سرادب sarādib , سراديب sarādīb  subterranean vault, cellar; basement, basement flat
سردار sirdār (formerly Eg.) supreme commander; commanding general
سرادق look up alphabetically
سردوك sardūk pl. سراديك sarādīk  rooster, cock (magr.)
سردين sardīn (coll.; n. un. ة) sardines
سيراس see سيراس and sirās سراس
(alphabetically)
سرسام sirsām a cerebral disease
 سرط sariṭa a (saraṭ, سرطان saraṭān) and saraṭa u i to swallow, gulp (ھ s.th.) V and VIII do.
سرطان saraṭān pl. -āt crayfish; cancer (med.); Cancer (astron.) │ بحري سرطان (baḥrī) lobster
صراط = sirāṭ سراط 
سرع saru‘a u (sirā‘, sarā‘, سرعة sur‘a) to be quick, fast, prompt, rapid; to hurry II to urge (ه s.o.) to hurry; to urge on (ھ an animal); to speed up, accelerate, expedite ( ھ s.th.) III to hurry, hasten, rush, run, dash (الى to); to make a beeline (الى for); to hurry (في in, with), hasten (j to do s.th.), do in a hurry (في s.th.); to rush, plunge with undue haste (في into) IV to be quick, fast, prompt, rapid; to hurry, hasten, rush, run, dash (الى to); to hurry (ب or في with. in), hasten (ب or j to do s.th.), do in a hurry (ب or في s.th.); to accelerate, speed up, expedite (ھ s.th.) V to hurry, hasten, rush, run, dash (الى to); to hurry (ب or j with, in), hasten (ب or في to do s.th.), do in a hurry (ب or j s.th.); to be hasty, be rash ( ب or j in) VI to hurry, hasten, rush, run, dash (الى to)
سرع sur‘, sir‘ pl. اسراع asrā‘ reins
سرع sur‘a speed, velocity, pace; fastness, rapidity, quickness, promptness; hurry, haste │الخاطر سرعة presence of mind; التصديق سرعة credulity
ما سرعان sar‘āna, sir‘āna, sur‘āna ma (with foll. verb) how quickly ...!; soon, before long, presently, in no time
سريع sarī‘ pl. سرعان sur‘ān, سراع sirā‘ fast, quick, prompt, rapid, speedy, expeditious, swift, nimble; السريع name of a poetic meter; express train; سريعا sarī‘an fast, quickly, rapidly, speedily, promptly
│التأثر سريع s. at-ta’attur easy to impress, easily affected, sensitive; الخاطر سريع
 quick-witted; O التردد سريع s. at-taraddud high-frequency (el.); الزوال سريع s. az- zawal ephemeral, fleeting, transient; سريع التصديق credulous; الطلقات) الطلق سريع) s. al- ṭalq quick-firing, rapid-fire; العطب سريع s. al-‘aṭab fragile; التنقل سريع s. at-tanaqqul mobile, maneuverable, easily manageable 407
اسرع asra’  faster, quicker, more rapid
│رايته ان اسرع ما mā asra‘a an ra’aituhū before long I saw him, it did not take very long before I saw him
سراعا sirā‘an quickly, in a hurry
اسراع isrā‘ acceleration, speed-up; hurry
تسرع tasarru‘ hurry, haste; hastiness, rashness precipitance
متسرع mutasarri‘ quick, fast, prompt, rapid; hasty, rash, precipitate
سر see سرعسكر
سرف IV to exceed all bounds, be immoderate, be extravagant (في in, at) exaggerate, overdo (في s.th.); to waste, squander, dissipate, spend lavishly (في ,ھ s.th., esp. money)
سرف saraf and اسراف isrāf intemperance, immoderateness, exaggeration; waste, dissipation, extravagance, prodigality
مسرف musrif immoderate, intemperate, excessive; extravagant, wasteful, prodigal
سرق saraqa i (saraq, sariq, سرقة saraqa, sariqa, سرقان sarqān) to steal, pilfer, filch (ھ من or ھ ه from s.o. s.th.); to rob (ھ من or ھ ه s.o. of s.th.) II to accuse of theft, call a thief (ه s.o.) III اليه النظر سارق (naẓara) or النظر سارقه to steal a glance at s.o., glance furtively at s.o.; النوم سارق (nauma) to take a short nap VII pass. of I VIII to steal, filch, pilfer (من ھ s.th. from s.o.); to steal (الى into) │السمع استرق (sam‘a) to eavesdrop; to monitor (radio, telephone, etc.); النظر سارق = اليه النظر استرق األنفاس استرق اليه؛ to gasp, pant
سرقة sariqa stealing, filching, pilfering; robbery; (pl. -āt) theft, larceny
سراق sarrāq thief
سارق sāriq pl. -ūn, سرقة saraqa, سراق surrāq, f. سارقة sāriqa pl. سوارق sawāriq thief
مسروقات masrūqāt stolen goods
al-qūwa m. منسرق القوة musariq: منسرق
debilitated, exhausted
سرقسطة sarqusṭa  Zaragoza (city in NE Spain)
سرقين sirqīn dung, manure
 سرك (Fr. cirque) sirke circus
  سركي(Turk. sergi) sarkī (com.) bill of exchange payable to the bearer
سرم surm pl. asrām anus
سرم sarmad endless duration, eternity
سرمدي sarmadī eternal, without beginning or end
سرنديب sarandīb  Ceylon
  سروsarw (coll.; n. un. ة) evergreen cypress (Cupressus sempervirens L.; bot.)
  سروII (قلبه عن or) عنه سرى to rid s.o. of worries, and the like, dispel s.o.’s worries (also ھ worries); pass. عنه سري and سرى نفسه عن (suriya) to leave s.o. (grief, sorrow, fear, and the like); to regain one’s composure, reel at peace again (after anger, fear or excitement); his anxiety or unrest left him; he found relaxation; he was cheered up, his spirits were raised VII عنه سري = عنه انسرى (surriya)
سري sarīy pl. سرواء surawā’ , اسرياء asriyā’ , سراة sarāh high-ranking, high; high-minded, noble; distinguished personality, notable; pl. سراة elite, leading class, the upper crust; see  سرى
سراة sarāh pl. سرروات sarawāt hill; back; chief, head; see also سرى sarīy │ القوم سروات s. al-qaum the leaden of the people
تسرية tasriya pl. -āt diversion, amusement, pastime
sarāwīl  سراويل pl. sirwāl سراويل sirwāl, سروال
trousers, pants; drawers; panties 408
 سرى sarā i (سرى suran, سريان sarayān, مسرى masran) to travel by night; to set out, depart by night; to circulate; to flow (electric current); to emanate, go out (من from); to spread; to be valid, have
 validity, be effective, be in, or come into, force (على for). have or take effect (على on); to apply. be applicable (على to); to penetrate (في s.th.), enter deeply (في into); to pervade (نفسه الى s.o.’s soul, of a feeling)
│سراه سرى (surāhu) to traverse one’s nightly course; مفعوله سرى (maf‘ūluhū) to be valid, be effective, be in force IV to travel by night; to make (ب s.o.) travel by night V تسرى see  سر sarra V
suryān سريان asriya, اسرية pl. sarīy سرى
little creek, brook; see also under  سرو
سرية sariya pl. سرايا sarāyā (military) detachment, flying column, raiding party; company (mil.) │خيالة سرية (kayyāla) cavalry squadron; الطائرات سرية squadron of aircraft
سريان sarayān spread, diffusion; validity, effectiveness, coming into force
مسرى masran: محمد مسرى masrā muḥammad the point of departure for Mohammed’s midnight journey to the seven heavens, i.e., Jerusalem
اسراء isrā’ nocturnal journey; االسراء Mohammed’s midnight journey to the seven heavens
سار sārin pl. سراة surāh traveling by night; night reveler, night hawk; contagious (disease); in force, effective, valid │المفعول سارى in force, effective, valid
سارية sāriya a mood or atmosphere which prevails in, or pervades, a room (e.g., الجھامة من سارية an all-pervading gloom); -- (pl. -āt, سوار sawārin) column; shipmast
 سراى and سراية look up alphabetically
 سريان suryān Syrians (coll.) members of the East Syrian Church
سرياني suryānī Syriac, Syrian; a member of the East Syrian Church
سرياوران saryāwarān (formerly) adjutant general
سيسبان look up alphabetically
 اسطبة look up alphabetically
 مسطبة masṭaba, misṭaba pl. مساطب masāṭib 
stone bench (against a wall); mastaba
سطح saṭaḥa u (saṭḥ) to spread out, spread, unfold, unroll (ھ s.th.); to level, even, plane, flatten, make smooth (ھ s.th.); to throw to the ground, fell (ه s.o.) II to spread out, spread, unfold, unroll (ھ
s.th.) ;: to level, even, plane, flatten, make smooth (ھ s.th.) V to be spread out, be unfolded; to be leveled, be evened; to lie down on one’s back VII to be spread out. be unfolded; to lie flat on one’s back, be supine
سطح saṭḥ pl. سطوح suṭūḥ surface (also geom.); plane (geom.); (pl. also اسطحة asṭiḥa, اسطح asṭuḥ) (flat) roof, terrace; deck (of a ship); سطوح suṭūḥ (eg., syr.) roof terrace │ البحر سطح s. al-baḥr sea level; مائل سطح inclined plane
سطحي saṭḥī external, outer, outward, outside, exterior; flat; superficial; سطحيات saṭḥīyāt externals, superficialities
سطحية satḥīya flatness; superficiality
سطيح saṭīḥ flat, spread out, stretched out, supine
مسطاح misṭāḥ threshing floor
مسطح musaṭṭaḥ even, level, flat; (pl.
-āt) surface │مسطحة قدم (qadam) flat foot
 سطر saṭara u (saṭr) and II to rule (ھ s.th.), draw lines (ھ on a sheet of paper); to write, jot down, record (ھ s.th.); to draw up, compose (ھ s.th.) 409
اسطر suṭūr, سطور pl. saṭar saṭr, سطر
asṭur, اسطار asṭār line; row
ساطور sāṭūr pl. سواطير sawāṭīr  cleaver
اسطورة usṭūra pl. اساطير asāṭīr  fable, legend, saga, myth; fabulous story, yarn
اسطورى usṭūrī mythical, legendary, fabulous
مسطرة misṭara pl. مساطر masāṭir  ruler; underlines, guideline sheet; see also alphabetically │O الحساب مسطرة slide rule
مسطار misṭār trowel
مسطرين masṭarīn (eg.) trowel
تسطير tasṭīr writing down, recording
مسطر musaṭṭar piece of writing, paper, document
 سيطر and derivatives look up alphabetically
 سطع saṭa‘a a (saṭ‘, سطوع suṭū‘) to rise; to spread (dust, fragrance); to shine, be brilliant, be radiant; to be or become manifest, obvious, plain, clear
سطع saṭ‘ brilliance, radiance, glow; brightness, luminosity
سطع saṭa‘ thump, thud, plump
سطوع suṭū‘ brilliance, radiance, glow; brightness, luminosity
اسطع asṭa‘ more brilliant, brighter; clearer, more obvious
ساطع sāṭi‘ pl. سواطع sawāṭi‘  radiant, brilliant, shining, luminous, bright; manifest, obvious, clear, plain, patent, evident (proof)
سطل saṭala u (saṭl) to intoxicate (s.o.) VII to become or be intoxicated
suṯūl سطول asṭāl, اسطال pl. saṭl سطل
bucket, pail (of wood or metal)
 اسطول look up alphabetically
سطام sitām plug, stopper
سطو) سطو) saṭā u (saṭw, سطو saṭwa) to rush, pounce, jump (ب or على upon), assail, attack (ب or على s.o.); to burglarize (على place), break into a place (على)
سطو saṭw attack, assault; burglary, housebreaking
سطوة saṭwa pl. saṭawāt attack, assault; influence, authority; presumption, cockiness, pride, power, strength
اسطوانة look up alphabetically
وسع see sa‘a سعة
سعتر sa‘tar (= صعتر) wild thyme (Thymus serpyllum; bot.)
سعد sa‘ida a and pass. su‘ida (sa‘d, سعادة sa‘āda) to be happy, lucky, fortunate; pass. ب سعد (su‘ida) to have the good fortune of receiving or sharing s.th. III to help, aid, assist (ه s.o., في or على in, with), give s.o. (ه) a hand (في or على in); to support, back (في or ه على s.o. in); to contribute, be conducive (في or على ل، to); to favor, encourage (في or على s.th.) IV to make happy (ه s.o); to help (ه s.o) │ اسعد الحظ) ب الحظ) he had the good fortune to ...
سعد sa‘d pl. سعود su‘ūd good luck, good fortune
السعدية الھيئة al-hai’a as-sa‘dīya the Saadist union (formerly a political movement in Egypt); السعديون as-sa‘dīyūn the Saadists, the followers of Saad Zaghlūl (1856-1927)
سعد su‘d Cyperus (bot.)
سعيد sa‘īd pl. سعداء su‘adā’ happy (ب about, at); radiant, blissful; lucky, auspicious; felicitous │ الذكر سعيد s. ad- dikr of blessed memory, the late ...
سعادة sa‘āda happiness; bliss, felicity; good fortune, success, prosperity, welfare; title of a pasha; sa‘ādat … (with foll. name) title of high officials (syr., 410 Leb.) │سعادتكم Your Grace (form of address to a pasha); السعادة صاحب title of a pasha; السعادة دار “House of Bliss”, ancient name of Istanbul
المملكة العربية│ Saudi sa‘ūdī سعودي Arabia Saudi (mamlaka) السعودية
ape sa‘ādīn  سعادين pl. sa‘dān سعدان
سعدانة│ teat nipple, -āt pl. sa‘dāna سعدانة doorknob الباب
اسعد as‘ad  happier, luckier
مساعدة musā‘ada pl. -āt support, backing, aid, help, assistance; encouragement, promotion
ساعد sā‘id pl. سواعد sawā‘id  forearm │ األيمن ساعده ھو (aiman) he is his right hand, he is indispensable to him; ساعده اشتد ištadda sā‘iduhū to become strong, powerful; ساعده في فت (fatta) to weaken s.o.
ساعدة sā‘ida pl. سواعد sawā’id  tributary
مسعود mas‘ūd pl. مساعيد masā‘īd  happy, lucky, fortunate
مساعد musā‘id helper, help, aide; assistant (adj. end n.); adjutant
مسعد mas‘ad favored by fortune, fortunate, lucky
سعر sa‘ara (sa‘r) to kindle, start (ھ a fire, a war); pass. su‘ira to flare up, run mad II to kindle, start (ھ a fire, a war); to price (ھ s.th.), set a price (ھ on s.th.); to quote on the stock market III to bargain, haggle over the price (ه with s.o.) IV to
 kindle, light, start (ھ fire) V to bum, blaze; to flare up (anger) VII to become mad, furious VIII to burn, flare, blaze; to break out (fighting)
سعر si‘r pl. اسعار as‘ār price; rate; exchange rate, quotation (stock market) │ الخصم سعرs. al-kaṣm discount rate, bank rate; التسليف سعر rate of interest; الفائدة سعر rate of interest; القطع سعر s. al-qaṭ‘ discount rate, bank rate; القطعة سعر s. al- qiṭ‘a price by the piece
سعر su‘r madness; frenzy; voracity
سعر su‘ur madness frenzy
سعار su‘ār voracity
سعير sa‘īr pl. سعر su’ur blazing flame, fire; blaze; bell, inferno
مسعر mis‘ar pl. مساعر masā‘ir  poker, fire iron
مسعار mis‘ār pl. مساعير masā‘īr  poker, fire iron
تسعير tas‘īr pricing, price fixing
تسعيرة tas‘īra pricing, price fixing │ لجنة التسعيرة lajnat at-t. pricing, price-fixing commission
تسعرة tas‘ira quotation (stock exchange)
مسعور mas‘ūr mad, crazy
سعط VIII to snuff (ھ tobacco)
سعوط sa‘ūṭ snuff
مسعط mis‘aṭ snuffbox
سعف III to help, aid, support (ه s.o.) IV to comply with s.o.’s (ه) wishes (ب for), humor (ه ب s.o. in), grant (ه ب s.o. s.th.); to help, aid, assist (ه s.o.)
سعف sa‘af (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. -āt palm leaves │ السعف احد aḥad as-s. Palm Sunday (Chr.)
اسعاف is‘āf pl. -āt aid, relief, help, assistance; medical service; االسعاف first- aid │ العجزة اسعاف i. al-‘ajaza care for the aged; االسعاف جمعية jam‘īyat al-i. approx.: civil ambulance service; اإلسعاف رجال first- aid men, ambulance men; medical orderlies, hospital corpsmen; اإلسعاف سيارة sayyārat al-i. ambulance
سعل sa‘ala a (سعل su‘la, سعل su‘al) to cough
سعلة su‘la cough
(dīkī) السعال الديكي │ cough su‘āl سعال 411 cough whooping
سعلى si‘lā pl. سعليات si‘layāt female demon
سعالة si‘lāh pl. سعال sa‘ālin female demon
سعن ابو abū su‘n marabou (zool.)
سعى sa‘ā a (sa‘y) to move quickly, run, speed; to move across the sky (moon); to head, be headed (الى for), proceed (الى to or toward); to strive (ل or الى for), aspire (ل or الى to); to work (ل الى، or وراء for), endeavor, attempt, make an effort (وراء or ل الى، to get or achieve s.th.); to run after s.th. (وراء), pursue, chase (وراء s.th.); to take stops (في in a matter) │ الى به سعى to lead s.o. or s.th. to ... ; فسادا األرض في سعى (fī l-arḍi fasādan) to spread evil, cause universal harm and damage; بظلفه لحتفه سعى (li-ḥatfihī bi-ẓifihī) to bring about one’s own destruction, dig one’s own grave; سعى الشيء خراب في (karābi š-š.) to work at the ruin of s.th., undermine s.th.; -- sa‘ā a ( سعى sa‘y, سعاية si‘āya) to slander (ب s.o., عند or الى to s.o), discredit (عند or ب الى s.o with) VI to run about in confusion
سعى sa‘y run, course; السعى the ceremony of running seven times between ṣafā and Marwa (performed during the Pilgrimage); effort, endeavor; livestock
سعاية si‘āya slander, calumniation
مسعى mas‘ān pl. مساع masā‘in effort, endeavor
ساع sā‘in pl. –ūn, سعاة su‘āh messenger; office boy, delivery boy; slanderer, calumniator │ البريد ساعى postman, mailman
سغب sagiba (sagab) to hunger (ل for), be or become hungry
سغب sagab hunger, starvation سغابة sagāba hunger, starvation مسغبة masgaba famine
ساغب sāgib hungry, starving
سف IV to descend, link, slip, decline (fig.); to stoop (الى to, fig.) │ اليه النظر اسف (naẓara) to give s.o. a sharp look VIII to eat,
 swallow (ھ s.th. dry, e.g., a medicinal powder)
سفوف safūf medicinal powder
اسفاف isfāf decline (fig.); triviality
سفتجة suftaja pl. safātij  bill of exchange (com.)
سفح safaḥa a (safḥ, سفوح sufūḥ) to pour out, spill, shed (ھ s.th.) ill to whore, fornicate ( ه with s.o.) VI to whore, fornicate
سفح safḥ pl. سفوح sufūḥ foot (of a mountain); pl. سفوح flat, rocky surface
سفاح saffāḥ shedder of blood, killer, murderer
سفاح sifāḥ fornication
سفد safida a and safada i (سفاد sifād) to cover, mount (على or ھا the female); to cohabit (ھا with a woman) II to put on a skewer (ھ meat) ill to cover, mount (ھا the female); to rohabit (ھا with a woman)
سفود saffūd pl. سفافيد safāfīd  skewer, spit
سفر safara i (سفور sufūr) to remove the veil (عن وجھھا ‘an wajhihā from her face), unveil o.s.; -- safara i (safr) to shine, glow (aurora) II to unveil, uncover, disclose (ھ s.th.); to send on a journey, compel to leave, send away (ه s.o); to dispatch, send off (ھ s.th.); to embark, put on board (ه passengers) III to travel, maim a trip; to leave, depart, go on a journey IV to shine, glow (aurora, s.o.’s face, etc.); to disclose, unveil, uncover (عن s.th.); to yield, achieve, bring (عن s.th.); to end (عن with, in), result (عن in) VII to rise, disappear (dust, clouds)
السفر as-sifr the travelers, the passengers
سفر sifr pl. اسفار asfār book (esp. one of the Scriptures) 412
سفر safar departure; (pl. اسفار asfār) journey, travel, trip, tour
سفرة safra pl. سفرات safarāt journey, travel, trip, tour
سفرية safarīya pl. -āt journey, travel, trip, tour; departure
سفرة sufra pl. سفر sufar dining table
سفرجي sufragī (eg.) pl. سفرجية sufragīya
waiter, steward
سفير safīr pl. سفراء sufarā’ mediator (between contending parties); ambassador (dipl.)
سفور sufūr uncovering of the face (of a veiled woman); unveiling
سفارة sifāra office or function of a mediator, mediation; embassy (dipl.)
مسافر masāfir  (pl.) part of the face not covered by the veil
سافر sāfir unveiled, wearing no veil; barefaced, conspicuous, obvious; (pl. سفرة safara) scribe
مسافر musāfir pl. -ūn traveler; passenger; visiting stranger; guest
سفرجل safarjal (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. سفارج quince (Cydonia; bot.)
سفسطة safsaṭa sophistry; pl. سفسطات sophistries, casuistic arguments │السفسطة اھل ahl as-s. the Sophists
سفسطي safsaṭī sophistic; Sophist
سفسة safsafa pl. سفاسف safāsif  silly talk, nonsense; poor, inferior stuff
سفساف safsāf pl. سفاسف safāsif  silly, inane, trivial; poor, inferior │ األمور سفساف poor, inferior stuff
سفط safaṭ pl. اسفاط asfāt basket; scales (of fish)
سفع safa‘a a (saf‘) to scorch, parch, burn (ه s.o., ھ s.o.’s skin; esp. of a hot wind); to flap the wings, flutter (bird); to strike, hit ( ه s.o. with the hand), slap (ه s.o.); to lash (ه s.th., e.g., of a storm)
سفع saf‘ burned spot
سفعة suf‘a pl. سفع sufa‘ black stain; dark spot, brown discoloration
اسفع asfa‘, f. سفعاء saf‘ā’  dark-brown
سفق safaqa u (safq) to shut, bang, slam (ھ the door)
سفك safaka i (safk) to shed (ھ blood) VI to murder each other VII to be shed, flow (blood)
سفك safk: الدماء سفك s. ad-dimā’ blood- shed
 سفاك saffāk shedder of blood; blood- shedding
سفل safala u (سفول sufūl, سفال safāl) and safila a to be low; to be below s.th. (ھ); -- safala u to turn downward; -- safula u ( سفالة safāla) and safala u (safl) to be low, base, despicable V to abase o.s., sink low, go from bad to worse; to act in a base manner
سفل sufl lowest part of s.th., bottom سفلى suflī lower, at the bottom; low سفلة sifla: الناس سفلة s. an-nās lowly
people, riffraff
سفالة safāla lowness; lowliness; baseness, ignominy, despicableness
سفالة safāla lowest part
اسفل asfal , f. سفلى suflā, pl. اسافل asāfil  lower; lowest; lower or lowest part, bottom; اسفل asfala (prep.) under, underneath, below │ السفلى األرض (arḍ) the nether world; سافلين اسفل رده raddahū asfala sāfilīn to reduce s.o. to the lowest level or status
سافل sāfil pl. سفلة safala low; lowly; base, mean, despicable 413
سفلت saflata to cover with asphalt, to asphalt
اسفلت asfalt asphalt
سفلقة saflaqa sponging
سفالق siflāq sponger
 سفن safan coarse hide used for polishing; emery paper, sandpaper
 سفين safīn ships (coll.); ship; see also alphabetically
safā’i  سفائن sufun, سفن pl. safīna سفينة │ (astron.) Argo السفينة boat; vessel, ship, سفينة تعليم gunboat; (midfa‘īya) سفينة مدفعية ship training سفينة التدريس and
سفان saffān shipbuilder, shipwright
سفانة sifāna (art or trade of) shipbuilding
  اسفينlook up alphabetically
سفنج safanj, sifanj and اسفنج isfanj sponge
سفه safiha a (safah) and safuha u (سفاھة safāha) to be stupid, silly, foolish; to be impudent, insolent II to call (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) stupid or
foolish; to declare (ه s.o.) legally incompetent; to depreciate, put down as inferior (ھ s.th.) │ نفسه سفهto make a fool of o.s.; وجھه سفه (wajhahū) to expose s.o., show s.o. up, make a fool of s.o., bring
s.o. in discredit, disgrace s.o., dishonor
s.o. VI to pretend to be stupid or foolish
سفه safah foolishness, stupidity, silliness; impudence, shamelessness, insolence
سفيه safīh pl. سفھاء sufahā’ , سفاه sifāh foolish, stupid, silly; fool; an incompetent (Isl. Law); impudent, shameless, insolent; insolent fellow
سفاھة safāha foolishness, stupidity, silliness; impudence, shamelessness, insolence
سفى safā i (safy) to raise and scatter (ھ the dust; said of the wind) IV do.
سافياء sāfiyā’  dust
مسفى masfan s.th. whirled up; play- thing, sport (fig.)
سفين safīn wedge
سقارة sigāra = سجارة cigarette سقالة (It. scala) saqāla scaffold سقر saqar  f. hell
سقراط suqrāṭ  Socrates
سقسقة saqsaqa chirping, cheeping, peeping (e.g., of sparrows)
سقط saqaṭa u (سقوط suqūṭ, مسقط masqaṭ) to fall (also = to be killed in action); to fall down, drop; to tumble, trip, slip; to fall out (hair); to sink down (على on, to); to hit, stumble (على upon), come across s.th. ( على); to find (على s.th.); to get, come (الى to s.o.), reach (الى s.o.); to decline, sink, drop (standard); to become null and void, be abolished, be canceled; to be dropped, be omitted, drop out; to be missing; to escape (من s.o.), slip (من s.o.’s memory) │ ليسقط فليسقط)) li-yasquṭ (fal-yasquṭ) down with
…! به سقط to drop s.o. or s.th.; عنه اليھم سقط انه they had had word from him that he ...; في رأسه سقط (ra’suh) he was born in ..., his birthplace was …; العضوية من سقط (‘uḍwīya) to be dropped from membership; عينيه من سقط (‘ainaihī) to drop in s.o.’s estimation; االمتحان في سقط to fail
 an examination, flunk; يده في سقط suqiṭa fī yadihī to stand aghast, be at a loss, be bewildered IV to let fall, drop (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to make (ه s.o.) tumble, cause s.o. ( ه) to slip; to overthrow, bring down, topple, fell (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to fail, flunk (ه
s.o. in an examination); to shoot down (ھ an aircraft); to deduct, subtract (ھ a number); to eliminate (٤١٤ ھ s.th. من from); to have a miscarriage, miscarry; to bring about a miscarriage (woman); to slink (ھ its young one; animal) │من اسقطه الجنسية (jinsīya) to deprive s.o. of his citizenship; في حقه اسقط (ḥaqqahū) to forfeit one’s right in s.th., waive one’s claim to s.th.; دعوى اسقط (da‘wā) to quash a complaint, nonsuit a case; to withdraw or drop a complaint; الشعر اسقط (ša‘ra) to cause loss of hair; يده في اسقط usqiṭa fī yadihī = يده في سقط saqaṭa fī yadihī V to learn gradually, pick up information (ھ من about s.th. from); to hunt for scraps │ تسقط األخبار to gather information VI to fall down, come down, collapse; to fall successively or gradually; to fall out (hair); to come gradually (الى to), arrive one by one (الى at); to roll, drip (من off); to dribble │ نفسه على تساقط to break down, collapse; حطاما تساقط (ḥuṭāman) to go to ruin, disintegrate
سقط saqṭ dew
سقط siqṭ miscarried fetus
سقط saqṭ, siqṭ, suqṭ sparks flying from a flint
سقط saqaṭ pl. اسقاط asqāṭ any worthless thing; offal, refuse, rubbish, trash; junk │ المتاع سقط s. al-matā‘ waste, scrap(s)
سقطى saqaṭī junk dealer, ragman
سقطة saqṭa pl. saqaṭāt fall, tumble, plunge; oversight, slip, error, mistake │ الطباعة سقطات misprints, errata
سقوط suqūṭ fall, tumble; crash (of an airplane); collapse, breakdown, ruin; decline, downfall, fall; devolution (of a right); slip, lapse │ الشعر سقوط s. aš-ša‘r loss of hair; األمطار سقوط rainfall
سقيط saqīṭ hail
سقاطة saqqāṭa, (eg.) suqqāṭa door latch
مسقط masqaṭ, masqiṭ pl. مساقط masāqiṭ  place where a falling object lands; waterfall │ افقي مسقط (ufqī) ground plan, horizontal section; رأسي مسقط (ra’sī) front elevation, vertical section (arch.); مسقط الرأس m. ar-ra’s birthplace, home
سقط masqaṭ  Muscat (seaport and capital of Oman)
اسقاط isqāṭ overthrow; shooting down (of an aircraft); miscarriage, abortion; deduction, subtraction; rebate │ من االسقاط الجنسية (jinsīya) abrogation of citizenship; gation of citizenship; الفرنك قيمة اسقاط (qīmat al-f.) devaluation of the franc
تساقط الثلوج │ hair) (of loss tasāqut تساقط
snowfall
ساقط sāqiṭ pl. سقاط saqāṭ fallen; base, mean, vile; disreputable, notorious (district); omitted, missing; forgotten
ساقطة sāqiṭa scrap; (pl. -āt) fallen woman, harlot
سقطراء suqṭrā’  Socotra (island, S of Arabia)
سقع saqa‘a a (saq‘) to slap, clap (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.)
مسقعة musaqqa‘a (eg.) dish of eggplant and meat
  سقفII to provide with a roof or ceiling, roof over (ه s.th.)
سقف saqf pl. سقوف suqūf, سقف suquf, اسقف asquf roof; ceiling │ الحلق سقف s. al- ḥalq palate
سقيفة saqīfa pl. سقائف saqā’if roofed passage; roofed gallery; roofing, shelter
تسقيف tasqīf roofing
مسقوف masqūf roofed, covered (ب with)
  اسقفasquf pl. اساقفة asāqifa look up alphabetically
سقالة look up alphabetically
سقلب saqlaba to throw down (ه s.o.)
سقلبي saqlabī pl. سقالبة saqāliba Slav;
Slavic 415
سقم saqima a (saqam) and saquma u (suqm, سقام saqām) to be or become sick, ill, ailing; to become thin, lean, skinny; to be
 poor, meager, measly II to make sick (ه s.o.) IV = II
سقم suqm pl. اسقام asqām illness, sickness; leanness, thinness, skinniness
سقم saqam pl. اسقام asqām illness; sickness; leanness, thinness, skinniness
سقام saqām illness, sickness; leanness, thinness, skinniness
سقيم saqīm pl. سقام siqām, سقماء suqamā’  sick, ill, ailing; skinny, lean, emaciated; meager, measly; poor, faulty (language)
مسقام masqām seriously suffering; constantly ailing, sickly
سقاوة siqāwa glanders
سقى saqā i (saqy) to give (ھ ه s.o. s.th.) to drink, make s.o. (ه) drink (ھ s.th.); to water (ھ cattle, plants); to irrigate (ھ s.th.); to dip, scoop, draw (water) │ سقى الفوالذ (fūlāda) to temper steel III to give (ه ھ s.o. s.th.) to drink; to conclude a lease contract (ه with s.o.; cf. مساقاة) IV to give (ه ھ s.o. s.th.) to drink, make s.o. (ه) drink (ھ s.th.); to water (ھ cattle, plants); to irrigate (ھ s.th.) VIII to ask (من s.o.) for a drink; to draw water (من from); to draw (من s.th., e.g., information, knowledge, etc., from), take, borrow, obtain (ھ من s.th. from) X to ask (من s.o.) for a drink (also ھ for s.th.); to pray for rain
سقى saqy watering; irrigation
asqiyāt, اسقيات asqiya, اسقية pl. siqā’ سقاء
اساق asāqin waterskin, milkskin
سقاء saqqā’ pl. -ūn water carrier; -- pelican (zool.)
سقاية siqāya irrigation, watering; office of water supplier (spec. the traditional office of one in charge of providing water for Mecca pilgrims); watering place; drinking vessel
مسقى misqā pl. مساق masāqin (eg.) irrigation canal
مساقاة musāqāh sharecropping contract over the lease of a plantation, limited to one crop period (Isl. Law)
صالة االستسقاء │ dropsy istisqā’ استسقاء
ṣalāt al-ist. prayer for rain
استسقائي istisqā’ī dropsical, hydropic
ساق sāqin pl. سقاة suqāh cupbearer,
Ganymede, saki
ساقية sāqiya barmaid; -- (pl. سواق sawāqin) rivulet; irrigation ditch, irrigation canal; water scoop; sakieh, water wheel
سك sakka u (sakk) to look, bolt (ھ the door); to mint, coin (ھ money); -- sakka (1  pers. perf. sakiktu) a (سكك sakak) and VIII to be or become deaf
سكة sikka pl. سكك sikak (minting) die; coin; road; (eg.) sidestreet, lane (narrower than شارع šāri‘) │ الحديد سكة and السكة الحديدية railroad; زراعية سكة (zirā‘īya) field path, dirt road; السكة دار mint
سكان sukkān pl. -āt rudder
اسك asakk f. سكاء sakkā’ , pl. سك sukk
deaf
مسكوك maskūka pl. -āt coin; drain hole (tun.) │ المسكوكات علم ‘ilm al-m. numismatics
سكارة sigāra pl. سكائر sagā’ir  (Syrian spelling) cigarette
سكارين sakārīn saccharin
سكب sakaba u (sakb) to pour out, shed, spill (ھ s.th.) VII to pour forth, be poured out; be shed, be spilled
سكيب sakīb shed, spilled 416
masākib  مساكب pl. maskab مسكب
melting pot, crucible
مسكوبية maskūbīya melting pot, crucible
سكباج sakbāj meat cooked in vinegar
سكت sakata u (sakt, سكوت sukūt, سكات sukāt to be silent, say nothing; to become silent, lapse into silence; to be or become quiet, calm down, subside; to pass over s.th. (IT) in silence; not to answer (عن s.o.); pass. sukita to have a stroke (med.) │ عنه سكت الغضب (gaḍab) his anger abated II to silence, calm, soothe, pacify (ه ھ، s.o. s.th.); to order to be silent, hush up (ه s.o.) IV do.; to conceal, refuse to tell (ھ s.th.)
سكت sakt silence; taciturnity, reticence
│السكت على silently, in silence, quietly
 سكتة sakta silence, quiet; stroke, apoplexy (med.) │ سكتة (qalbīya) heart failure
سكات sukāt silence; taciturnity, reticence
سكوت sukūt silence; taciturnity, reticence; see also alphabetically
سكوتي sukūtī taciturn, reticent سكوت sakūt taciturn, reticent سكيت sikkīt habitually silent ساكت sākit silent, mum; taciturn,
reticent; still, quiet, calm, tranquil; quiescent (letter)
 سكر sakara u (sakr) to shut, close, lock, bolt (
ھ s.th.) II do.
 سكر sakara a (sakar, sukr) to be drunk; to get drunk, become intoxicated IV to make drunk, intoxicate, inebriate (ه s.o.) VI to pretend to be drunk
سكر sukr intoxication, inebriety, drunkenness
سكر sakar an intoxicant; wine
سكرة sakra pl. sakarāt inebriety, intoxication, drunkenness │الموت سكرة s. al-maut agony of death
سكارى pl. sakrā, سكرى f. sakrān , سكران
sukārā, sakārā drunk, intoxicated; a drunk
│ طينة سكران (ṭīna) (colloq.) dead drunk
سكير sikīr drunkard, heavy drinker
مسكر muskir pl. -āt alcoholic beverage, intoxicating liquor
 سكر II to sugar, sprinkle with sugar (ھ s.th.); to candy, preserve with sugar (ھ s.th.)
سكر sukkar sugar; pl. سكاكر sakākir  sweetmeats, confectionery, candies │ سكر الثمار fructose, levulose, fruit sugar; سكر الشعير maltose, malt sugar; العنب سكر s.
al-‘inab dextro-glucose, dextrose, grape sugar; القصب سكر s. al-qaṣab saccharose, sucrose, cane sugar; اللبن سكر s. al-laban lactose, milk sugar; النبات سكر s. an-nabāt sugar candy, rook candy; السكر قصب qaṣab as-s. sugar cane; السكر مرض maraḍ as-s. diabetes
سكري sukkarī sugar (adj.), sugary, like sugar, saccharine; سكرات confectionery;
مرض البول السكري│ candy sweetmeats,
(maraḍ al-baul) diabetes
سكرية sukkarīya sugar bowl
مسكرات musakkarāt confectionery, sweetmeats, candy
 سكارة pl. سكائر look up alphabetically
 سيكران look up alphabetically
سكرتاة (It. sicurtà) sikurtāh insurance
سكرتارية (Fr. secrétariat) sekretārīya
secretariat; secretaryship
سكرتو (It scarto) sikartō cotton waste
سكرتير (Fr secrétaiea) sekretēr secretary │ عام سكرتير (‘āmm) secretary-general
سكرتيرية sekretērīya secretariat 417
سكرجة sukurruja, sukruja pl. سكاريج sakārīj 
bowl; platter, plate
سكروز sukrōz saccharose, sucrose
سكرين sukkarīn saccharin
سكسك II tasaksaka to behave in a servile manner
سكسكة suksuka wren (?)
تسكسك tasaksuk servility
سكسوني saksūnī Saxonian; Saxon
سكسونيا saksōniyā Saxonia
سكع V to grope about (الظلمة aẓ-ẓulmata in the dark); to loiter, loaf, hang around; to proceed aimlessly, dawdle, potter │ طرده التسكع حيث الى (ḥait t-tasakku‘u) to drive
s.o. out into the dark, leave s.o. to an uncertain fate
سكاف sakkāf shoemaker
سكافة sikāfa shoemaker’s trade, shoemaking
اساكفة pl. iskāfī اسكافي and iskāf اسكاف
asākifa shoemaker
اسكفة askafa threshold, doorstep; lintel
ساكف sākif lintel
اسكلة pl. اساكل look up alphabetically
  سكن sakana u (سكون sukūn) to be or become still, tranquil, peaceful; to calm down, repose, rest; (gram.) to be vowelless (consonant, i.e., have no vowel
 immediately fallowing); to abate, subside, remit, cease (anger, pain, and the like); to pass, go away (عن from s.o. pain), leave ( عن s.o., pain); to remain calm, unruffled ( الى at, in the face of); to be reassured (ل، الى by); to rely (الى ل، on), trust, have faith (الى ل، in); to feel at home (الى in, at); -- sakana u (sakan, سكنى suknā) to live, dwell (ب or ھ في، in), inhabit (ب or ھ في، s.th.) II to calm (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), reassure, appease, placate (ه s.o.), soothe, allay, alleviate (ھ pain, and the like); (gram.) to make vowelless (ھ a consonant, i.e., pronounce it without a following vowel) III to live together, share quarters (ه في with s.o. in) IV to give or allocate living quarters (ه to s.o.); to settle, lodge, put up ( ه ھ s.o. in) VI to live together, share quarters
سكن sakan means or time for rest; dwelling, abode, habitation; inhabited area, human habitations; ashes
سكني sakanī ashen, ash-gray
وسكناته حركاته في fī ḥarakātihī wa sakanātihī in all his doings; in every situation
سكنة sakina pl. -āt residence, home
سكون sukūn calm, tranquility, peace; silence, quiet; (gram.) vowellessness of a medial consonant; the graphic symbol of this vowellessness │ الطائر سكون seriousness, sedateness, gravity
سكان sakkān cutler
سكان sukkān pl. -āt rudder
سكين sikkīn m. and f. pl. سكاكين sakākīn 
knife
سكينة sakīna pl. سكائن sakā’in  immanence of God, presence of God; devout, God-inspired peace of mind; calm, tranquility, peace
سكينة sikkīna knife
سكنى suknā living, dwelling; stay, sojourn │ السكنى محل maḥall as-s. place of residence
سكاكيني sakākīnī cutler
مسكن maskan, maskin pl. مساكن masākin  dwelling, abode, habitation; house; home, residence, domicile
تسكين taskīn pacification, tranquilization, placation 418
اسكان settling, settlement; allocation of living quarters
سواكن f. sakana, سكنة -ūn, pl. sākin ساكن
sawākin  calm, motionless, still;
--vowelless (medial consonant); stagnant, standing (water); O statio (electricity); (pl. سكان sukkān, سكنة sakana) dweller, inhabitant, resident, occupant; السكان the population │ الجنان ساكن inhabitant of Paradise, deceased person, one of blessed memory; السكان كثير populous; ساكنا يحرك ال (yuḥarriku) he doesn’t budge, he doesn’t bend his little linger, he remains immobile, apathetic; ساكنه حرك (sākinahū) to rouse, agitate s.o.
مسكون maskūn populated, inhabited; haunted (place); possessed (person) │ الدار مسكونة the house is haunted
المسكونة al-maskūna the inhabited world, the world
مسكوني maskūnī ecumenical (Chr.)
مسكن musakkin pl. -ūn pacifier, soother; (pl. -āt) sedative, tranquilizer
مساكن musākin pl. -ūn fellow citizen, neighbor
up look مساكين pl. مسكين and مسكنة  alphabetically
سكنجبين sakanjabīn oxymel (pharm.)
sikandināwa سكندناوة and skandināfiyā سكندينافيا
Scandinavia
سكندنافي sikandināfī Scandinavian
as-s. ‘īd عيد السكوت sukkōṭ): (Hebr. سكوت
Sukkoth, Feast of Tabernacles (Jud.)
سكي skī ski
 سل sal imperative of سأل sa’ala
 سل salla u (sall) to pull out, withdraw, or remove gently (ھ s.th.); pass. sulla to have pulmonary tuberculosis, be consumptive V to steal away, slink away, slip away, escape; to spread, extend, get (الى to), reach (الى s.th.); to slip, slink, sneak, steal (الى into); to betake o.s., go (الى to, with secret designs); to invade, infiltrate, enter (الى s.th.); to penetrate (في to, as far as) VII to steal away, slink away, slip away,
 escape; to slip, slink, sneak, steal (الى into); to infiltrate (الى s.th., also pol.); to advance singly or in small groups (troops in the field; mil.); to have pulmonary tuberculosis, be consumptive VIII to pull out or remove gently (ھ s.th.); to withdraw gently (ھ s.th., e.g., كفه kaffahū one’s hand, عن from); to unsheathe, draw ( ھ the sword); to wrest, snatch (ھ من from
s.o. s.th.)
سل sall basket
سل sill, sull consumption, phthisis, tuberculosis │ التدرني السل (tadarrunī) tuberculosis; الرئوي السل (ri’awī) pulmonary tuberculosis
سلة salla pl. سالل silāl basket │سلة المھمالت s. al-muhmalāt wastepaper basket; السلة كرة kurat as-s. basketball
سليل salīl drawn (sword); descendant, scion, son
سليلة salīla pl. سالئل salā’il  (female) descendant
سالل sallāl basketmaker, basket weaver
ساللة sulāla pl. -āt descendant, scion; progeny, offspring; family; race; strain, stock, provenience (of economic plants)
ساللى sulālī family (adj.)
مسلة masalla pl. -āt, مسال masāll  large needle, pack needle; obelisk
تسلل tasallul infiltration (pol.); offside position (in football, hockey, etc.)
انسالل insilāl infiltration (pol.)
مسلول maslūl consumptive, affected with pulmonary tuberculosis
مستلة mustalla pl. -āt offprint (ir.) 419
سأل sala’a a (sal’) to clarify (ھ butter)
سالء silā’ pl. اسلئة asli’a clarified butter
سالطة salāṭa salad
سالفي sulāfī Slavic; (pl. -ūn) Slav سالقون salāqūn red lead, minium سالقى see سلق
سالنيك salānīk  Salonica (seaport in NE Greece)
سلب salaba a (salb) to take away, steal, wrest, snatch (من ه or ھ ه from s.o. s.th.), rob, strip, dispossess, deprive (من ه or ھ ه s.o. of s.th.); to plunder, rifle, loot (ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to strip of arms and clothing (ه a fallen enemy); to withhold (ھ ه from s.o. s.th.), deny (ھ ه to s.o. s.th.); -- saliba a (salab) to put on or wear mourning, be in mourning V to be in mourning VIII = salaba
سلب salb spoliation, plundering, looting, pillage, robbing; negation │ عالمة السلب ‘alāmat as-s. minus sign (math.)
│ passive el.); (also negative salbī سلبي (muqāwama) المقاومة السلبية or الدفاع السلبي resistance passive
سلبية salbīya negativism, negative attitude
سلب salab pl. اسالب aslāb loot, booty, plunder, spoils; hide, shanks and belly of a slaughtered animal; -- ropes, hawsers (eg.)
سالب sillāb pl. سلب sulub black clothing, mourning (worn by women)
سالب sallāb robber, plunderer, looter سليب salīb stolen, taken, wrested away اسلوب uslūb pl. اساليب asālīb  method,
way, procedure; course; manner, mode, fashion; style (esp. literary); stylistic peculiarity (of an author) │ كتابي اسلوب (kitābī) literary style
استالب istilāb spoliation, plundering, looting, pillage, robbing
سالب sālib negative (adj.); (pl. سوالب
sawālib ) O negative (phot.)
مسلوب maslūb unsuccessful
سلبند salaband martingale (of the harness)
سلت salata i u to extract, pull out (ھ s.th.); to chop off (ھ s.th., esp. a part of the body)
VII to steal away, slip away
سلق = (eg.) salg سلج
السالجقة as-salājiqa the Seljuk
سلجم saljam turnip (Brassica rapa; bot.); (eg.) rape (Brassica napus; bot.)
سلح salaḥa a (salḥ) to void excrement; to drop dung (bird) II to arm (ھ ه s.o. with) V to
 arm o.s. VI to engage in battle, fight, cross swords
سلح salḥ and سالح sulāḥ excrements, dung, droppings
سالح silāh pl. اسلحة asliḥa arm, weapon; arms, weapons; service (as a branch of the armed forces); armor; steel gripper, steel claw; plowshare الطيران سالح s. aṭ-ṭayarān air force; الفرسان سالح s. al-fursān cavalry; السالح شاك šākk as-s. bristling with arms, armed to the teeth; سالحه سلم sallama silāḥahū to lay down one’s arms, surrender
سالحدار silāḥdār sword-bearer, shield- bearer, squire
سليح salīḥ pl. -ūn apostle (Chr.)
تسليح taslīḥ pl. -āt arming, equipping; armament, rearmament; armoring, reinforcement (in ferroconcrete construction)
تسلح tasalluḥ armament, rearmament │ التسلح سباق sibāq at-t. arms race
مسلح musalliḥ armorer
سلح musallaḥ armed; armored, reinforced (with steel); = Fr. armé │ القوات ٠٢٤ المسلحة (qūwāt) the armed forces;
مسلح اسمنت (ismant) ferroconcrete, reinforced concrete; مسلحة خرسانة (karsāna) do.; مسلح زجاج (zujāj) wired glass
سلحفاء sulaḥfāh, silaḥfāh pl. سالحف salāḥif 
turtle, tortoise
سلحفائية sulḥafā’īya dawdling, dilatoriness
سلخ salaka a u (salk) to pull off, strip off (ھ s.th.); to skin, flay (ھ an animal); to detach (عن ھ s.th. from); to end, terminate, conclude, bring to a close (ھ a period of time); to spend (ھ a period of time, في doing s.th.) V to peel (skin, from sunburn) VII to be stripped off, be shed (skin, slough); to shed, cast off (من عن، the slough, the skin), strip off, take off (من عن، clothing); to abandon, give up, cut off (ھ a trait, a quality); to get detached (من عن، from), come off (من عن،); to withdraw, retire (من from); to pass, end (month)
سلخ salk detaching; skinning, flaying; snakeskin, slough; end of the month
سلخ salk: سلخ خشب (kašab) (barkless) soft wood, alburnum, sapwood
سالخ sallāk pl. ة, -ūn butcher
سلخ salik skinned, flayed; tasteless, insipid (food)
سليخة salīka Chinese cinnamon tree (Cinnamomum cassia; bot.); cinnamon bark, cassia bark
سخانة salkāna pl. -āt slaughterhouse, abattoir
masālik  مسالخ pl. maslak مسلخ
slaughterhouse, abattoir
مسالخ mislāk snakeskin, slough
منسلخ munsalak end of the month
سلس salisa a (salas, سالسة salāsa) to be tractable, docile, compliant, obedient; to be smooth, flowing, fluent (style) IV to make tractable, render obedient, subdue ( ه ,ھ s.o., s.th.); to make easy, smooth, fluent (ھ s.th.)
سلس salas incontinence of urine
سلس salis tractable, pliable, docile, compliant, obedient; flexible, smooth, fluent (style) │ القياد سلس s. al-qiyād tractable, pliable, docile, compliant, obedient
سالسة salāsa tractability, pliability, docility, compliance, obedience (also القيادة سالسة s. al-qiyāda); smoothness, fluency (of style)
اسلس aslas  more tractable, more pliable, more obedient; more flexible, smoother, more fluent
سلسبيل salsabīl name of a spring in Paradise; spring, well
سلسل salsala to link together, concatenate, interlink, interlock, connect, unite (ھ s.th. ب with); to chain up, enchain, fetter, shackle (ه s.o.); to pour (في الماء water into)
│ الى سلسله to trace s.o.’s lineage back to
s.o. II tasalsala to flow down, trickle (in a continuous stream); to drip, dribble, fall in drops (water); to form a chain or series, be continuous; to be interlinked, interlocked, linked together, concatenate
سلسل salsal cool fresh water
 سلسلة silsila pl. سالسل salāsil  iron chain; chain (also fig.); series (of essays, articles, etc.) │ الجبال سلسلة mountain chain; سلسلة الظھر s. aẓ-ẓahr, backbone, vertebral column; الفقرية السلسلة (faqrīya) do.; سلسلة األكاذب fabric of lies; النسب سلسلة s. an- nasab lineage, line of ancestors
تسلسل tasalsul sequence, succession │ بالتسلسل without interruption, successively, consecutively, continuously; بتسلسل نشره to serialize s.th., publish s.th. in serial form 421
مسلسل musalaal chained; continuous (numbering) │ مسلسل فعل رد (raddu fi‘lin) chain reaction (phys.); المسلسلة المرأة (mar’a) Andromeda (astron.)
متسلسل mutasalsil continuous (numbering)
  سلط II to give (ه s.o.) power or mastery (على over), set up as overlord, establish as ruler (ه على s.o. over); to impose, inflict (ه على a penalty on s.o.); to bring to bear, exert (ھ force, pressure, and the like, على on); to load, charge (ھ على s.th. with electric current) │ ايديھم عليه سلطوا (aidiyahum) they laid violent hands on …, dealt high- handedly with ...; الكالب عليه سلط to set the dogs on s.o. V to overcome, surmount ( على s.th.); to overpower, overwhelm (على s.o.); to prevail, gain the upperhand (على over), get the better of (على); to be absolute master (على of), rule, reign, hold sway (على over); to control, supervise, command (على s.th.)
سلط sulṭa pl. -āt, سلط sulaṭ power, might, strength; authority; sway, dominion, influence, sovereign power, jurisdiction; (pl. -āt) official agency, authority │األبوية السلطة (abawīya) paternal authority; patriarchy; الروحية السلطة (rūḥīya) spiritual power; التشريعية السلطة (tašrī‘īya) legislative power; عسكرية سلطة (‘askarīya) military authority; القضائية السلطة (qaḍā’īya) judicial power; التنفيذية السلطة (tanfīdīya) executive power
سلطة salṭa jacket
سليط salīṭ strong, solid, firm; glib; impudent, sharp, loose, vicious (tongue)
سالطة salāṭa glibness; impudence, lack of restraint (in one’s language); see also alphabetically
تسلط tasalluṭ mastery, sway, dominion; rule, influence, authority, supremacy (على over); supervision, control
  سلطsalaṭa and سالطة salāṭa salad
سلطح III اسلنطح islanṭaḥa to be broad, be wide
سالطح sulāṭiḥ wide
سلطن salṭana to proclaim sultan, establish as ruler (ه s.o.) II تسلطن tasalṭana to become sultan or ruler
سلطنة salṭana sultanate
سلطان sulṭān m. and f. power, might, strength; rule, reign, dominion, sway; authority; mandate, authorization; legitimation (ب for); -- (pl. سالطين salāṭīn ) sultan; (absolute) ruler │ ابراھيم سلطان s. ibrāhīm red mullet (Mullus barbatus; zool.); سلطان من به ﷲ انزل ما (anzala llāhu) (lit.; God has revealed no legitimation for it; with preceding indeterminate noun) vain, unfounded, baseless, arbitrary
سلطانة sulṭāna sultana, sultaness
سلطاني sulṭānī of the sultan; sovereign, imperial, royal │ سلطاني طريق imperial highway
سلطانية suṭānīya soup bowl, tureen; large metal bowl
سلع Sali‘a a (sala‘) to crack, become cracked VII to split, break open, burst
سلع sal‘ pl. سلوع sulū‘ crack, fissure, rift
سلعة sil‘a pl. سلع sila‘ commodity, commercial article; sebaceous cyst, wen
سلف salafa u (salaf) to be over, be past, be bygone; to precede, antecede II to lend, loan, advance (ه ھ to s.o. money) IV to make (ھ s.th.) precede; to lend, loan, advance (ھ ه to s.o. money) │ القول) اسلفنا) (qaul) we have already said, we have previously stated; اسلفنا كما as we have already said V to borrow (من ھ s.th. from); to contract a loan VIII = V
سلف silf pl. اسالف aslāf brother-in-law
سلفة silfa sister-in-law 422
 سلف salaf and pl. اسالف aslāf predecessors; forebears, ancestors, forefathers; سلف advance payment, prepayment; free loan, noninterest-bearing loan; سلفا salafan in advance, beforehand, before │ الصالح السلف the worthy ancestors, the venerable forefathers
سلفية salafīya pl. -āt free loan; (cash) advance
السلفية as-salafīya an Islamic reform movement in Egypt, founded by Mohammed ‘Abduh (1849-1906)
سلفة sulfa pl. سلف sulaf loan; (cash) advance; inner lining of shoes, inner sole
سالف sulāf choicest wine (made of the juice flowing from unpressed grapes)
سالفة sulāfa = سالف sulāf سلفاء sulafā’  predecessors مسلفة mislafa harrow
سعر التسليف │ advance credit, taslīf تسليف credit بنك التسليف interest; of rate at-t. si‘r bank
تسليفة عقارية │ loan credit, talīfa تسليفة
(‘aqārīya) land credit
sullāf, سالف salaf, سلف pl. sālif سالف
سوالف sawālif, preceding, foregoing,
former, previous, bygone, past; predecessor; سالفا sālifan formerly, previously; above (as a reference in books, etc.) │ األحداث سوالف former, or past, events; الذكر سالف s. ad-dikr aforementioned; العروس سالف s. al-‘arūs amaranth (bot.); الزمان سالف في fī s. iz- zamān in former times, in the old days
 سلفات sulfāt sulfate │ النشادر سلفات s. an- nušādir ammonium sulfate
 O سلفت salfata to asphalt (ھ s.th.)
O مسلفت musalfat asphalted
سلفيد sulfīd sulfide
سلق salaqa u (salq) to lacerate the skin (ه of s.o.; with a whip); to remove with boiling water (ھ s.th.); to boil, cook in boiling water (ھ s.th.); to scald (ھ plants; said of excessive heat); to hurt (ه s.o., بلسانه bi- lisānihī with one’s tongue, i.e., give s.o. a
tongue-lashing) V to ascend, mount, climb, scale (ھ s.th.); to climb up (plant)
سلق salq (eg.), silq a variety of chard, the leaves of which are prepared as a salad or vegetable dish
السالق as-sullāq Ascension of Christ
سالقة salāqa vicious tongue, violent language
سليقة salīqa pl. سالئق salā’iq  dish made of grain cooked with sugar, cinnamon and fennel (syr.); inborn disposition, instinct
سلقون salaqūn and سالقون salāqūn red lead, minium
سالقي salāqī saluki, greyhound, hunting dog
سلوقي salūqī saluki, greyhound, hunting dog
تسلق tasalluq climbing; ascent
مسلوق maslūq cooked, boiled (meat, egg, vegetable)
masālīq  مساليق pl. maslūqa مسلوقة
bouillon, broth
al-mutasalliqa an-nabātāt النباتات المتسلقة
climbing plants, creepers
سلك salaka u (salk, سلوك sulūk) to follow (ھ a road), travel (ھ along a road); to take (ھ a road), enter upon a course or road (ھ; fig.); to behave, comport o.s. (نحو toward s.o.); to proceed, act; to set foot (ھ on), enter (ھ a place); -- salaka (salk) to insert (في ھ s.th. in), stick (في ھ s.th. into); to pass (ھ thread, اإلبرة في through the eye of a needle), thread a 423 needle │ في سلكه السلسلة (silsila) to chain s.o. up II to clean, clear (ھ s.th., esp. pipelines, canals, etc.); to unreel, unwind (ھ yarn); to clarify, unravel, disentangle (معقدا امرا amran mu‘aqqadan a complicated affair) IV to insert (في ھ s.th. in), stick (في ھ s.th. into); to pass (ھ thread, لإلبرة في through the eye of a needle), thread a needle
سلك silk pl. اسالك aslāk thread; string (also, of a musical instrument); line; wire; rail (Mor.); -- organization, body; profession (as a group or career); corps; cadre │ األرض سلك s. al-arḍ or األرضي السلك (arḍī) ground wire; بحرية اسالك (baḥrīya) underwater cable; O الحراري السلك
 (h>arārī) filament (of a radio tube); O المتحكم السلك (mutaḥakkim) grid (of a radio tube); (السياسي السلك (رجال (siyāsī) diplomatic corps; الشرطة سلك s. aš-šurṭa the police; الشائك السلك barbed wire; O سلك
السلك التعليمي (el.); fuse االنصھار الواقى the profession, teaching the (ta‘līmī) the al-qaḍā’ s. سلك القضاء teachers; السلك المقاوم O judicature; the judiciary, السلك الھوائي O (el.); resistor (muqāwim) انتظو في )الى( السلك aerial; antenna, (hawā’ī) organization an of member a be to البحري and organization an join to like; the and (baḥrī) االنتظام الى السلك البحري e.g., like, the انخراط في also (as navy the into entrance )سلك
سلكي silkī by wire, wire (adj.)
السلكي lā-silkī wireless; radio, broadcasting (adj. and n.); radiogram; radio specialist │ السلكية اشارة (išāra) radio message; السلكي عامل radio operator
سلكة silka pl. سلك silak wire; thread; string (also, of a musical instrument)
سلوك sulūk behavior, comportment, demeanor, manners; conduct, deportment, attitude │ السلوك حسن ḥusn as-s. good behavior, good manners; السلوك قواعد or السلوك آداب etiquette
مسلك maslak pl. مسالك masālik  way, road, path; course of action, policy; procedure, method │ البولية المسالك (baulīya) the urinary passages (anat.); الھواء مسالك m. al-hawā’ the respiratory passages (anat.); مسلكا سلك to enter upon a course (fig.)
مسلكي maslakī professional, vocational, industrial, trade (adj.)
سالك sālik cleaning, clearing
سالك sālik passable, practicable (road); entered upon (course); clear, open, not blocked, not obstructed (also anat.); (pl.
-āt) one who follows the spiritual path (esp. myst.)
مسلوك maslūk passable, practicable (road); entered upon (course)
سلم salima a (سالمة salāma, سالم salām) to be safe and sound, unharmed, unimpaired, intact, safe, secure; to be unobjectionable, blameless faultless; to be
certain, established, clearly proven (fact); to be free (من from); to escape (ه من danger) II to preserve, keep from injury, protect from harm (ه s.o.), save (من ه s.o. from); to hand over intact (ھ s.th., ل or الى to s.o.); to hand over, turn over, surrender (ه ,ھ s.o., s.th., ل or الى to s.o.); to deliver ( ل ھ or الى to s.o. s.th.); to lay down (ھ arms); to surrender, give o.s. up (ل or الى to); to submit, resign o.s. (ل or الى to); to greet. Salute (على s.o.); to grant salvation (God to the Prophet); to admit, concede, grant (ب s.th.); to consent (ب to s.th.), approve (ب of s.th.), accept, sanction, condone (ب s.th.) │ ﷲ الى امره سلم (amrahū) to commit one’s cause to God, resign o.s. to the will of God; روحه سلم (rūḥahū) to give up the ghost; نفسه سلم األخير (nafasahū) to breathe one’s last, be in the throes of death; للبوليس نفسه سلم (nafsahū) to give o.s. up to the police; سلم واإلساءة الحسنى على اليه (ḥusnā, isā’a) 424 to put o.s. at s.o.’s mercy; عليه لي سلم (salim) give him my best regards! remember me to him! وسلم عليه ﷲ صلى (sallā) God bless him and grant him salvation (eulogy after the name of the Prophet Mohammed) III to keep the peace, make one’s peace, make up (ه with s.o.) IV to forsake, leave, desert, give up, betray (ه s.o.); to let sink, drop (ركبتيه الى رأسه ra’sahū i. rukbataihī one’s head, to one’s knees); to hand over, turn over (الى to s.o., ھ or ه s.o. or s.th.); to leave, abandon (ھ الى s.th. to s.o.); to deliver up, surrender, expose (الى ه s.o. to); to commit o.s. resign o.s. (<I to the will of God, with ellipsis of نفسه or اسلم) ؛(امره alone:) to declare o.s. committed to the will of God, become a Muslim, embrace Islam │ ﷲ الى امره اسلم (amrahū) to commit one’s cause to God, resign o.s. to the will of God; الروح) روحه اسلم) (rūḥahū) to give up the ghost V to get, obtain (ھ s.th.); to receive (ھ s.th.); to have (ھ s.th.) handed over or delivered; to take over, assume (ھ the management of s.th.) │ الحكم مقاليد تسلم (m. al-ḥukm) to take (the reins of) power VI to become reconciled with one another, make peace with one another VIII to touch, graze (ھ s.th.); to receive, get, obtain (ھ s.th.); to take over (ھ s.th.), take possession (ھ of) X to surrender, capitulate; to give way, submit, yield,
 abandon o.s. (ل or الى to s.th.); to give o.s. over (ل or الى to s.th.; to a man, said of a woman); to lend o.s., be a party (ل or الى to s.th.); to succumb (ل to)
سلم salm peace
سلم silm m. and f. peace; the religion of Islam │السلم حب ḥubb as-s. pacifism
سلمي silmī peaceful; pacifist
سلم salam forward buying (Isl. Law); a variety of acacia
سلم sullam pl. ساللم salālim , سالليم salālīm  ladder; (flight of) stairs, stair- case; stair, step, running board; (mus.) scale; means, instrument, tool (fig.) │ سلم متحرك (mutaḥarrik) escalator
سلمة sullama step, stair
سالم salām soundness, unimpairedness, intactness, well-being; peace, peacefulness; safety, security; -- (pl. -āt) greeting, salutation; salute; military salute; national anthem │ العام السالم (‘āmm) general welfare, commonweal; السالم دار Paradise; an epithet of Baghdad; Dar es Salaam (seaport and capital of Tanganyika); السالم مدينة (the City of Peace
=) Baghdad; السالم نھر nahr as-s. the  Tigris; عليكم السالم (salāmu), عليكم سالم peace be with you! (a Muslim salutation); عليه السالم upon him be peace (used parenthetically after the names of angels and of pre-Mohammedan prophets); سالم يا exclamation of dismay, esp. after s.th. calamitous has happened: good Lord! good heavens! oh dear! على سالم يا exclamation of amazement or grief about s.th.: there goes (go) ...! what a pity for ...! how nice is (are) ...! اليه سالمي بلغ (ballig) give him my kind regards! remember me to him! والسالم (and) that’s all, and let it be
done with that; سالم ... على it’s all over with
...
سالملك (Turk. selamlιk) selāmlιk selamlik, reception room, sitting room, parlor
سالمة salāma blamelessness flawlessness; unimpaired state, soundness, integrity, intactness; well-being, welfare; safety, security; smooth progress; success
collective (ijmā‘īya) السالمة االجماعية │
security; الذوق سالمة s. ad-dauq good taste; البالد (امالك) سالمة the integrity of the country; النية سالمة s. an-nīya sincerity, guilelessness; النية بسالمة in good faith, bona fide; سالمتك a speedy recovery! مع السالمة (a greeting of 425 farewell, said by the person remaining behind) approx.: good-by! farewell! السالمة على <I الحمد (ḥamdu) praised be God for your well- being! (said to the traveler returning from a journey)
سليم salīm pl. سلماء sulamā’  safe, secure; free (من from); unimpaired, undamaged, unhurt, sound, intact, complete, perfect, whole, integral; faultless, flawless; well; safe and sound; safe; healthy; sane; (euphemistically) seriously injured or damaged, on the verge of ruin │ البنية سليم s. al-bunya healthy, sound in body; العاقبة سليم benign (disease); العقل سليم s. al-‘aql sane; النية سليم s. an-nīya, القلب سليم s. al-qalb guileless, sincere, good- natured; سليم ذوق (dauq) good taste
sulāmayāt سالميات pl. sulāmā سالمى
phalanx, digital bone (of the hand or foot)
سالمية sulāmīya pl. -āt phalanx, digital bone (of the hand or foot)
اسلم aslam  safer; freer; sounder; healthier
حوت سليمان │ Solomon sulaimānī سليماني
ḥūt s. salmon
سليماني sulaimānī corrosive sublimate, mercury chloride
تسليم taslīm handing over, turning over; presentation; extradition; surrender (of s.th.); delivery (com.; of mail); submission, surrender, capitulation; salutation; greeting; concession, admission; assent, consent (ب to), acceptance, approval, condonation, unquestioning recognition (ب of)
مسالمة musālama conciliation, pacification
اسالم islām submission, resignation, reconciliation (to the will of God); -- االسالم the religion of Islam; the era of Islam; the Muslims
اسالمي islāmī Islamic
 اسالمية islāmīya the idea of Islam,
Islamism; status or capacity of a Muslim
اسالمبولي look up alphabetically
تسلم tasallum receipt; taking over, assumption; reception
استالم istilām receipt; acceptance; taking over, assumption │ االستالم افادة acknowledgment of receipt
استسالم istislām surrender, capitulation; submission, resignation, self-surrender
سالم sālim safe, secure; free (من from); unimpaired, unblemished, faultless, flawless, undamaged, unhurt, intact, safe and sound, safe; sound, healthy; whole, perfect, complete, integral; regular (verb)
│ السالم الجمع (jam‘) sound (= external) plural (gram.)
مسلم musallam unimpaired, intact, unblemished, flawless; (also به مسلم) accepted, uncontested, incontestable, indisputable, incontrovertible
مسالم musālim peaceable, peaceful, peace-loving; mild-tempered, lenient, gentle
مسلم muslim pl. -ūn Muslim
مستلم mustalim recipient; consignee
سلندر (Fr. cylindre) silender pl. -āt cylinder (of an automobile, and the like)
سلو) سال) salā u (سلو sulūw, سلوان sulwān) and سلي saliya a (سلي sulīy) to get rid of the memory of (ه ھ، or عن), forget (ه ھ، or عن s.o., s.th.), think no more (ه ھ، or عن of) II to make (ه s.o.) forget (عن s.o., s.th.); to comfort, console, solace (ه s.o., عن for the loss of); to cheer up (ه s.o.); to distract. divert (ه عن s.o.’s mind from); to amuse, entertain (ه s.o.); to alleviate, dispel (ھ worries and the like) IV = II V to delight, take pleaure (ب in), have a good time, have fun, amuse o.s. (ب with); to console
o.s. (ب عن for s.th. 426 with), find comfort (ب عن for s.th. in); to seek distraction or diversion (ب عن from s.th. in)
سلوى salwā, sulwā solace, consolation, comfort; fun, amusement, entertainment, distraction, diversion; pastime │ سلوة في ھو العيش من (‘aiš) he leads a comfortable life
سلوى salwā consolation, solace, comfort
سالوى pl. )سلواة un. (n. salwā سلوى
salāwā quail (zool.)
سلوان sulwān forgetting, oblivion; consolation, solace, comfort
مسالة maslāh pl. مسال masālin object of amusement; amusement, entertainment, fun, distraction, diversion; solace, consolation, comfort
تسلية tasliya consolation, amusement, distraction, diversion, fun; pastime, entertainment
مسل musallin amusing, entertaining; comforting, consoling; comforter, consoler
سلوفينيا slovēniyā Slovenia
□ مسلي maslī (eg.) = سمن samn: cooking butter
│ نباتي مسلي (nabātī) vegetable butter
سلينيوم silīniyūm selenium
 اسم ism pl. اسماء asmā’, اسام asāmin name; appellation; reputation, standing, prestige; (gram.) noun; اسما isman nominally │ اسم التأليف pen name, nom de plume; الكتابة اسم do.; تجاري اسم (tijārī) firm name (com.); علم اسم ism ‘alam proper name; جامد اسم (gram.) primary noun (not derived from a verb form); الجمع اسم ism al-jam‘ (gram.) collective noun (which, though forming no nomen unitatis, has a broken plural);
الجمعي الجنس اسم ism al-jins al-jam‘ī (gram.) generic collective noun (which can form a nomen unitatis; e.g., rv. /lamam pigoons); اإلشارة اسم ism al-išāra (gram.) demonstrative pronoun; التصغير اسم (gram.) diminutive; العدد اسم ism al-‘adad (gram.) numeral; المعنى اسم ism al-ma‘nā (gram.) abstract noun; العين اسم ism al-‘ain (gram.) concrete noun; التفضيل اسم (gram.) elative; الفعل اسم ism al-fi‘l (gram.) verbal noun, nomen verbi; الفاعل اسم (gram.) nomen agentis, active participle; المفعول اسم (gram.) nomen patientis, passive participle; المرة اسم ism al-marra (gram.) nomen vicis; الحسنى األسماء (ḥusnā) the 99 names of God (Isl.); فالن باسم in s.o.’s name, on behalf of s.o.; ﷲ بسم in the name of God; الجمعية رئيس باسم الطلبات تقدم (tuqaddamu ṭ-ṭalabāt) applications will be addressed to the chairman of the society
 اسمي ismī in name only, nominal, titular; nominal (gram.) │ اسمي مبلغ (mablag) nominal par; اسمية جملة (jumla) nominal clause (gram.); اسمية قيمة (qīma) nominal value, face value
  سم samma u (samm) to put poison (ھ into s.th.); to poison (ه s.o., ھ s.th.) II to poison (ھ s.th.) V to be poisoned, poison o.s.
سم samm pl. سموم sumūm, سمام simām poison, toxin; venom; opening, hole; eye (of a needle) │ البيضاء السموم (baiḍā’) the white narcotics (such as cocaine, Heroin, etc.)
سموم samūm f., pl. سمائم samā’im  hot wind, hot sandstorm, simoom
مسام masāmm , مسامات masāmmāt (pl.) pores (of the skin)
مسامي masāmmī porous
مسامية masāmmīya porousness, porosity
تسمم tasammum poisoning, toxication; sepsis │ البولي التسمم (baulī) uremia; التسمم الدموي (damawī) blood poisoning, toxemia
سام sāmm poisonous; toxic, toxicant; venomous 427
مسموم masmūm poisoned; poisonous
مسم musimm poisonous; venomous; toxic, toxicant
سمانجوني samānjūnī sky-blue, azure, cerulean سمباتوي simbātawī sympathetic (physiol.)  سمت III to be on the other side of (ھ), be
opposite s.th. (ھ), face s.th. (ھ)
سمت samt pl. سموت sumūt way, road; manner, mode; السمت azimuth (astron.) │ الرأس سمت s. ar-ra’s zenith, vertex (astron.); الشمس سمت s. aš-šams ecliptic (astron.); االعتدال سمت equinoctial colure (astron.); القدم سمت s. al-qadam nadir (astron.); االنقالب سمت solstitial colure (astron.); السمت نظير nadir (astron.); اخذ الى سمته to take the road to ...
وسم see ,سمة of pl. سمات  
سمج samuja to be ugly, disgusting, revolting II to make (ھ s.th.) ugly or loath-some
سمج samj pl. سماج simāj and samij pl. سماجى samājā ugly, disgusting, loathsome, revolting
سميج samīj pl. سماج simāj, سماجى samājā, سمجاء samajā’  ugly, disgusting, loathsome, revolting
سماجة samāja ugliness, abominableness, odiousness
سمح samuḥa u (samḥ, سماح samāḥ, سماحة samāḥa) to be generous, magnanimous, kind, liberal, openhanded; -- samaḥa a ( سماح samāḥ) to grant from a generous heart (ل ب s.o. s.th.); to allow, permit (ان or ل ب s.o. s.th. or to do s.th.); to authorize, empower (ل ب s.o. to do s.th.) │ ﷲ سمح ال God forbid! II to act with kindness III to show o.s. tolerant (ه with s.o., في or ب in), treat kindly, with indulgence (في or ه ب s.o. in the matter of), forgive (في or ه ب s.o. s.th.) VI to be indulgent, forbearing, tolerant (في مع toward s.o. in), show good will (في in); to be not overparticular (في in); to practice mutual tolerance X to ask s.o.’s (ه) permission; to ask forgiveness, apologize
سمح samḥ magnanimity, generosity; kindness; liberality, munificence
سمح samḥ pl. سماح simāḥ magnanimous, generous; kind; liberal, openhanded
سماح samāḥ magnanimity, generosity; kindness; liberality, munificence; indulgence, forbearance, tolerance, forgiveness, pardon; permission (ب for, to do s.th.)
سماحة samāḥa magnanimity; generosity; kindness; liberality, munificence; indulgence, forbearance, tolerance; سماحته His Eminence, المفتي سماحة His Eminence the Mufti (title of a mufti)
سميح samīḥ pl. سمحاء sumahā’  generous, magnanimous; kind, forgiving; liberal, openhanded
السمحاء الحنيفة al-ḥanīfa as-samḥā’ the true and tolerant (religion. i.e., Islam)
مسامحة musāmaḥa pardon, forgiveness; (pl. -āt) vacation, holidays
تسامح tasāmuḥ indulgence, forbearance, leniency, tolerance
به مسموح masmūḥ bihī allowed, permitted, permissible, admissible │ مسموحات licenses, privileges, prerogatives
 متسامح mutasāmiḥ indulgent, forbearing (مع toward), tolerant
سمحاق simḥāq pl. سماحق samāḥiq  periosteum (anat.)
  سمد samada u (سمود sumūd) to raise one’s head proudly, bear one’s head proudly erect (also with الرأس) II to dung, manure, fertilize (األرض the soil)
سماد samād pl. اسمدة asmida dung, manure, fertilizer │ صناعي سماد (ṣinā‘ī) 428 chemical fertilizer; عضوي سماد organic fertilizer
تسميد tasmīd manuring, fertilizing
سامد sāmid: الرأس سامد s. ar-ra’s with head erect
مسمدات musammidāt fertilizers
 □ سميد samīd (= سميذ) semolina (syr.); a kind of biscuit or rusk, sometimes ring-shaped and sprinkled with sesame seed (eg.)
سمدور sumdūr pl. سمادير samādīr  dizziness, vertigo
سميذ samīd semolina
  سمر samura u (سمرة sumra) to be or turn brown; -- samara u (samr, سمور sumūr) to chat in the evening or at night; to chat, talk (generally) II to nail, fasten with nails (الى ھ s.th. to or on); to drive in (المسمار al- mismār the nail) III to spend the night or evening in pleasant conversation, chat at night or in the evening (ه with s.o.); to converse, talk, chat(ه with s.o.) V to be or get nailed down, be fastened with nails: to stand as if pinned to the ground VI to spend the night or evening in pleasant conversation, chat with one another at night or in the evening; to converse, talk, chat IX = I samura
سمر saar pl. اسمار asmār nightly, or evening, chat; conversation, talk, chat; night, darkness
سمرة sumra brownness, brown color
سمار samār (eg.) a variety of rush used for plaiting mats (Juncus spinocus F., bot.)
│ صلب ھندي سمار (hindī ṣulb) a variety of bamboo
سمير samīr companion in nightly entertainment, conversation partner;
entertainer in general, with stories, songs, music, amusing improvisations)
سميرة samīra woman partner in nightly or evening conversation; woman entertainer; woman companion (who entertains with lively conversation)
اسمر asmar , f. سمراء samrā’ , pl. سمر sumr brown; tawny; pl. سمراوات samrāwāt brown-skinned women
مسامر masāmir  (pl.) evening or nightly entertainments (conversations, also games, vocal recitals, storytelling, etc.)
مسمار mismār pl. مسامير masāmīr  nail; peg; pin, tack, rivet; corn (on the toes)
المسماري الخط al-kaṭṭ al-mismārī cuneiform writing
مسامرة musāmara nightly or evening chat; conversation, talk, chat
سامر sāmir pl. سمار summār companion in nightly entertainment; causeur, conversationalist; entertainer
سوامر sawāmir  (pl.) evenings of entertainment, social evenings; evening or nightly entertainments (conversations, also games, vocal recitals, storytelling, etc.)
مسمر musammar fastened with nails, nailed on, nailed down; provided, or studded, with nails; hobnailed
مسامر musāmir companion in nightly entertainment, conversation partner
  السامرة as-sāmira the Samaritans
سامري sāmirī Samaritan; (pl. -ūn, سمرة
samara) a Samaritan
  سمور pl. سمامير look up alphabetically
سمرقند samarqand  Samarkand (city in Uzbek S.S.R.)
سمسر samsara to act as broker or middleman سمسرة samsara brokerage; caravansary سمسار simsār pl. سماسرة samāsira, سماسر
samāsir , سماسير samāsīr  broker, jobber, 429 middleman, agent │ األسھم سمسار s. al- ashum stockbroker
سمسيرة samsīra (ir.) go-between, match- maker
 سمط samaṭa u (samṭ) to scold (ھ s.th.); to prepare (ھ s.th.)
سمط simṭ pl. سموط sumūṭ string, thread (of a pearl necklace)
سماط simāṭ pl. -āt, سمط sumuṭ, اسمطة asmiṭa cloth on which food is served; meal, repast
مسمط masmaṭ pl. مسامط masāmiṭ  scalding house (where the carcasses of slaughtered animals are scalded)
O مسمط mismaṭ pl. مسامط masāmiṭ  vine prop
سمع sami‘a a (sam‘, سماع samā‘, سماعة samā‘a, مسمع masma‘) to hear (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.; ب of or about s.th.; من ھ s.th. from s.o.); to learn, be told (من ھ of or about s.th. from s.o.); to listen, pay attention (الى or ل to s.th.; من to s.o.), hear s.o. (من) out; to learn by hearsay (ب about s.th.); to overhear (ب s.th.); to give ear, lend one’s ear (الى or ل to s.o., to s.th.) │ به يسمع لم (yusma‘) unheard-of II to make or let (ه s.o.) hear ( ھ s.th.), give (ھ ه s.o. s.th.) to hear; to recite (ھ s.th.); to say (ھ one’s lesson); to dishonor, discredit (ب s.o.) IV to make or let (ه s.o.) hear (ه s.th.), give (ھ ه s.o. s.th.) to hear; to let (ه s.o.) know (ھ s.th. or about s.th.), tell (ھ ه s.o. about s.th.) V to give ear, listen, lend one’s ear (ل الى، to s.o., to s.th.); to eavesdrop, listen (secretly) VI الناس به تسامع people heard about him from one another, word about him got around, he became known among people VIII to hear, overhear (ھ s.th.); to listen, listen closely, give ear, lend one’s ear (الى or ل or ه ھ، to s.o. or s.th.); to eavesdrop; to auscultate (على s.o.)
سمع sam‘ hearing, sense of hearing, audition; ears; (pl. اسماع asmā‘) ear │ شاھد السمع earwitness; والطاعة السمع as-sam‘u
wa-ṭ-ṭā‘a and وطاعة سمعا sam‘an wa ṯā‘atan I hear and obey! at your service! very well! سمعھم تحت in their hearing, for them to hear; السمع استرق istaraqa s-sam‘a to eavesdrop; to monitor, intercept; القى اليه بسمعه (alqā) to listen to s.o.; سمعه مد madda sam‘ahū to prick up one’s ears
سمعي sam‘ī auditory, auditive, hearing (used attributively); acoustic; acoustical;
traditional │ السمعيات علم ‘ilm as-sam‘īyāt
acoustics
سمعة sum‘a reputation (specif., good reputation), credit, standing, name │ حميد السمعة (حسن) hamīd (ḥasan) reputable, respectable; السمعة (سيء) رديء radī’ (sayyi’) ill-reputed, disreputable
سماع samā‘ hearing, listening, listening in; auditioning, audition; hearing, receiving (e.g., of a verdict); (gram. and lex.) generally accepted usage
سماعي samā‘ī acoustic; acoustical; audible; (gram. and lex.) sanctioned by common usage; derived from tradition, traditional, unwritten (Isl. Law)
سماعيات samā‘īyāt acoustics (phys.)
سميع samī‘ pl. سمعاء suma‘ā’  hearing, listening; hearer, listener; السميع the All- hearing (one of the 99 attributes of God)
سماعة sammā‘a pl. -āt earphone; earpiece; (telephone) receiver; stethoscope; ear trumpet; knocker, rapper (of a door)
مسمع masma‘ earshot, hearing distance
│ من مسمع على in the hearing of, within earshot of; منه مسمع على for him to hear, so that he could hear it
مسمع misma‘ pl. مسامع masāmi‘  ear; O stethoscope; (telephone) receiver │ 430 مسامعھم على in their hearing, for them to hear
مسمعة misma‘a earpiece; (telephone) receiver
سامع sāmi‘ pl. -ūn hearer, listener
مسموع masmū‘ audible, perceptible │ الكلمة مسموع m. al-kalima one whose word carries weight, is paid attention to
مستمع mustami‘ pl. -ūn hearer, listener; pl. المستمعون the audience
 سمق samaqa u (سموق sumūq) to be high, tall, lofty, tower up
سموق samūq very high, towering; tall and lanky
سامق sāmiq very high, lofty, towering
 سماق summāq sumac (Rhus; bot.); its highly acid seeds which, after being dried and
 ground, serve, together with thyme, as a condiment
سماقي حجر ḥajar summāqī porphyry
سمك II to make thick, thicken (ھ s.th.)
سمك samk roof, ceiling
سمك sumk thickness
سمك samak (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. سماك simāk, اسماك asmāk fish │ موسى سمك s. mūsā plaice (zool.)
سمكة samaka (n. un.) a fish; السمكة the Fish, Pisces (astron.)
سمكي samakī fish-like, fishy, piscine, fish (adj.)
سماك simāk: السماكان as-simākān Arcturus and Spica Virginis (astron.) │ الرامح السماك Arcturus (astron.); السماك األعزل (a‘zal) Spice Virginis (astron.); حلق السماكين الى (ḥallaqa) to have high-flown aspirations
سماك sammāk fishmonger; fisherman, fisher
سميك samīk thick
سماكة samāka thickness
مسامك masāmik  fish stores, sea-food stores
سمكرة samkara tinsmith’s trade, tinsmithing
سمكري samkarī tinsmith, tinner, white- smith
سمكرية samkarīya trade or work of a tinsmith, tinsmithing
سمل samala u (saml) to gouge, scoop out, tear out (عينه ‘ainahū s.o.’s eye); -- samala u (سمول sumūl, سمولة sumūla) to be worn, tattered, in rags (garment) IV to be worn, tattered, in rags (garment) VIII to gouge, scoop out, tear out (عينه ‘ainahū s.o.’s eye)
سمل samal pl. اسمال asmāl worn garment; tatters, rags; last remainder of a liquid in a vessel │ السمل حتى الكأس شرب to drain the cup to the dregs
سمن samina a (siman, سمانة samāna) to be or become fat, corpulent, obese, stout, plump, fleshy, put on weight II and IV to make fat or plump, fatten (ه s.o.)
سمن samn pl. سمون sumūn clarified butter, cooking butter
سمن siman fatness, plumpness, fleshiness, stoutness, corpulence; obesity
سمنة simna fatness, plumpness, fleshiness, stoutness, corpulence; obesity
سمون summūn (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. سمامن
samāmin  quail (zool.)
سمين samīn pl. سمان simān fat; corpulent, plump, fleshy, stout, obese
سمان summān (coll.; n. un. ة) quail (zool.)
سمان sammān butter merchant
calf ar-rijl s. سمانة الرجل samāna: سمانة leg the of
سمانى sumānā (coll.; n. un. سماناة sumānāh) pl. سمانيات sumānayāt quail (zool.)
مسمن musamman fat 431
سمنتو (Sp. cemento) cement
samānjūnī سمانجوني and samanjūnī سمنجوني
sky-blue, azure, cerulean سمندر samandar salamander سمندل samandal salamander
سمھوري samhūrī tall and husky, extremely tall, of giant stature (السمھورية القامة); spear (originally epithet of a strong, tough spear)
وسم see sima سمة
سمو) سما) samā u (سمو sumūw) to be high, elevated, raised, erect, lofty, tall, eminent, prominent; to rise high, tower up; to be above or beyond s.th. or s.o. (عن), rise above, tower above (عن); to be too proud (or for); to be too high or difficult (عن for s.o.), be or go beyond the understanding of s.o. (عن), exceed s.o.’s (عن) understanding; to rise (الى to, على above or beyond); to be higher (على than); to strive (الى for), aspire (الى to, after) │ به سما to lift, raise, elevate, elevate load up, bring up s.o. or s.th. (الى to); to buoy s.o. up, boost, encourage s.o. III to seek to surpass or excel (ه s.o.): to vie for superiority or glory (ه with s.o.) IV to lift, raise, elevate, erect, load up, bring up (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) VI
 to vie with one another for glory; to be high, elevated, raised, erect, lofty, tall, eminent, prominent; to rise high, tower up; to be above or beyond s.th. or s.o. ( عن), rise above, tower above (عن); to claim to be higher in rank (على than s.o. else), claim to be above s.o. (على); to deem o.s. highly superior
سمو sumūw height, altitude; exaltedness, loftiness, eminence, highness
صاحب Duke; the Grace His سمو الدوق │ Highness; Royal His (malakī) السمو الملكى سمو Highness; Royal Her صاحبة السمو الملكي character of nobility األخالق
سماء samā’ m. and f., pl. (سماوات (سموات samāwāt heaven, sky; firmament │ سماء السماوات the highest heaven
سمائي samā’ī heavenly, celestial; sky, blue, azure, cerulean
سماوي samāwī heavenly, celestial; sky, blue, azure, cerulean; descended from heaven; open-air, outdoor, (being) under the open sky; divine, pertaining to God and religion
سمي samīy high, elevated; exalted, lofty, sublime, august
اسمى asmā higher, farther up, above; more exalted, higher (in rank), more eminent, loftier, more sublime
سام sāmin pl. سماة sumāh high, elevated; exalted, lofty, eminent, sublime, august │ سام امر (amr) royal decree; السامي المندوب the High Commissioner
سمور sammūr pl. سمامير samāmīr  sable (Martes zibellina; zool.)
سمى II to name, call, designate, denominate ( ه ھ، s.o., s.th., ب or ھ by or with a name), give a name (ه ھ، to s.o., to s.th.); to title, entitle (ھ or ب ھ s.th. as or with); to nominate, appoint (ل ه s.o. to s.th.); to pronounce the name of God by saying بسم عليه ﷲ سمى │ ﷲ (sammā llāha) or عليه سمى to invoke God over s.th. by saying ﷲ بسم IV to name, call, designate, denominate ( ه ھ، s.o., s.th., ب or ھ by or with a name), give a name (ه ھ، to s.o., to s.th.); to title, entitle (ھ s.th., ھ or ب as or with) V to be called, be named │ بزيد تسمى he was named Zaid, he called himself Zaid
سم  see ism اسم
سمى samīy namesake
تسمية tasmiya pl. -āt naming, appellation, designation, name, denomination; nomenclature; = بسمل basmala (use of the formula ٢٣٤ (ﷲ بسم
مسمى musamman named, called, by name of; -- (pl. مسميات musammayāt) designation, appellation, name; sense, meaning (of a word) │ مسمى أجل الى (ajalin) for a limited period, غير أجل الى مسمى for an indefinite time, sine die, until further notice
 سنة sana pl. سنون sinūn, سنوات sanawāt year │ محمدية سنة (muḥammadīya) Mohammedan year; كبيسة سنة leap year; مسيحية سنة (masīḥīya) year of the Christian era, A.D.; ھجرية سنة (hijrīya) year of the Muslim era (after the hegira), A.H.; ميالدية سنة (mīlādīya) year of the Christian era, A.D.
سنوي sanawī annual, yearly; سنويا sanawīyan annually, yearly, in one year, per year, per annum
مسانھة musānahatan annually, yearly
وسن see sina سنة 
 سن sanna u (sann) to sharpen, whet, hone, grind (ھ s.th.); to mold, shape, form (ھ s.th.); to prescribe, introduce, enact, establish (ھ a law, a custom) │ قانونا سن to enact, or pass, a law II to sharpen, whet, hone, grind (ھ s.th.); to indent, jag, notch (ھ s.th.) IV to grow teeth, cut one’s teeth, teethe; to grow old, to age; to be advanced in years VIII to clean and polish one’s teeth with the سواك; to take, follow (ھ a course or way); to prescribe, introduce, enact, establish (ھ a law, a custom) │ استن محمد سنة (sunnata m.) to follow the Sunna of Mohammed
سن sann prescription, introduction, enactment, issuance (of laws)
سن sinn f., pl. اسنان asnān, اسنة asinna, اسن asunn tooth (also, e.g., of a comb; of a saw blade); jag; cog, sprocket, prong; tusk (of an elephant, of a boar, etc.); fang (of a snake, etc.); point, tip (of a nail), nib (of a pen); (pl. اسنان asnān) age (of a person); -- (eg.) coarse flour, seconds │ الرشد سن s.
ar-rušd legal age, majority; الفيل سن s. al-
 fīl ivory; السن صغير young; السن كبير old; السن في طعن to be advanced in years, be aged; السن به تقدمت (taqaddamat) to grow older, to age; to be advanced in years
سنة sunna pl. سنن sunan habitual practice, customary procedure or action, norm, usage sanctioned by tradition; السنة or النبي سنة s. an-nabīy the Sunna of the Prophet, i.e., his sayings and doings, later established as legally binding precedents (in addition to the Law established by the Koran) │ السنة اھل ahl as-s. the Sunnites, the orthodox Muslims; الطبيعة سنة law of nature
سني sunnī Sunnitic; (pl. -ūn) Sunnite,
Sunni
سنن sanan customary practice, usage, habit, rule
سنان sinān pl. اسنة asinna spearhead
سنون sanūn tooth powder
اسن asann  older, farther advanced in years
مسن misann pl. -āt, مسان masann
whetstone, grindstone; razor strop
مسنون masnūn prescribed (as Sunna), sanctioned by law and custom; sharpened, whetted, honed; tapered; pointed (e.g., mustache, features); stinking, fetid (mire)
مسنن musannan toothed, serrated, dentate, denticulate, indented, jagged; pointed, sharp; sharp-featured (countenance)
مسننة musannana pl. -āt cogwheel
مسن musinn pl. مسان masānn  old, aged, advanced in years; of legal age, legally major
سنو ٣٣٤ see سنا
سنارة sinnāra pl. سنانير sanānīr  fishing tackle; fishhook
سنباذج sanbādaj grindstone, whetstone; emery
سنبوق sunbūq pl. سنابيق sanābiq  barge, skiff, boat
 سنبك sunbuk pl. سنابك sanābik  toe of the hoof; hoof; awl, punch, borer
 سنبك sunbuk pl. سنابك sanābik and سنبوك sunbūk pl. سنابيك sanābīk  barge, skiff, boat
سنبل sunbul (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. -āt, سنابل sanābil  ear, spike (of grain); السنبلة Virgo (astron.) │ الرومي السنبل (rūmī) Celtic spikenard (Nardus celtica; bot.); السنبل الھندي (hindī) Indian spikenard (Nardotachys jatamansi; bot.)
سنبلي sunbulī spiciform, spicat, shaped like a spike or ear (bot.)
سنبوسك sanbūsik, sanbūsak (syr., ir.) triangular meat pie with a wavy bread crust
سنت cent
سنتمتر satimitr pl. -āt centimeter
 سنجة sanja pl. سنج sinaj, سنج sanajāt weight (placed as a counterpoise on the scales of a balance)
 سنجة singa (from Turk. süngü) pl. سنج sinag
bayonet (eg.)
 سناج sināj soot, smut
سنجاب sinjāb gray squirrel; fur of the gray squirrel
سنجابي sinjābī ash-colored, ashen, gray
سنجق sanjaq pl. سناجق sanājiq  standard, flag, banner; sanjak, administrative district and subdivision of a vilayet (in the Ottoman Empire)
سنح sanaḥa a (sunḥ, sunūḥ, سنوح sunūḥ) to occur (ل to s.o.), come to s.o,’s mind (ل, idea, thought); to present itself, offer itself (ل to s.o., esp. an opportunity); to afford ( ل ب s.o s.th.); -- to dissuade (ه عن s.o. from his opinion), argue or reason (ه عن s.o. out of his opinion)
سانح sāniḥ pl. سوانح sawāniḥ  turning its right side toward the viewer (game or bird); auspicious, propitious; favorable, good (opportunity); pl. سوانح auspices, good omens, auspicious signs; ideas, thoughts
سانحة sāniḥa opportunity
سنخ sink pl. اسناخ asnāk, سنوخ sunūk root, origin; alveolus, gingival margin of a tooth (anat.)
سنخ sanak rankness (of oil). fustiness
 سنخ sanik rank, rancid (oil), fusty
سناخة sanāka rankness (of oil), fustiness
 سند sanada u (سنود sunūd) to support o.s., prop
o.s. rest (الى on, upon), lean, recline (الى upon, against) II to support, stay, prop, lean (ھ s.th.) III to support, back, assist, help, aid (ه s.o.) IV to make (ه s.o.) rest ( الى on); to make (ه s.o.) lean or recline (الى against, on); to lean (ھ الى s.th. against); to rest, support, prop (ھ الى s.th. on); to base, found (ھ الى s.th. on); (science of Islamic traditions:) to base a tradition (ھ) on s.o. ( الى) as its first authority, i.e., to trace back the ascription of a tradition. in ascending order of the traditionaries, to its first authority so as to corroborate its credibility; (gram.) to lean a term (ھ) upon another (الى) being the subject of the sentence, i.e., to predicate it, make it its predicate; to entrust (ل or ھ الى s.th. to s.o.). vest (ل or ھ الى s.th. in s.o.); to attribute, ascribe (ل ھ or الى to s.o. s.th.); to incriminate, charge (الى ھ s.o. with); to lean (الى against, to, on), rest (الى on); to be based, he founded (الى on) │ الى التھمة اسند (tuhma) to direct one’s suspicion on 434 or toward ...; الى التھمة اسند (usnidat) suspicion fell on ... VI to support one another, give mutual support; to support
o.s. lean, rest; to trust, rely VIII to lean, recline, be recumbent (الى على، against, on); to rest one’s arms, one’s weight (على، الى on), support one’s weight (الى على، by); to be based, be founded (الى على، on); to rely (الى على، on), trust, have confidence ( الى على، in); to use as (documentary) basis (على, s.th.), rest one’s case on (سند (على sanad pl. -āt, اسناد asnād support, prop, stay, rest, back; backing; (pl. اسناد) ascription (of an Islamic tradition), the (uninterrupted) chain of authorities on which a tradition is based │ خشبية سندات (kašabīya) wooden struts, wood bracing;
-- (pl. -āt) document, deed, paper, legal instrument; voucher, record; commercial, or negotiable, paper, security, bond; debenture, promissory note, note of hand, debenture bond │ البضائع شحن سند s. saḥn al-b. bill of lading; السند رجال informants, authorities, sources
سندان sandān, sindān pl. سنادين sanādīn 
anvil
مسند musnad, masnad pl. مساند masānid  support, prop, stay; rest, back (of an armchair); cushion, pillow
اسناد isnād pl. اسانيد asānīd  ascription (of an Islamic tradition), the (uninterrupted) chain of authorities on which a tradition is based; اسانيد (documentary) proof, vouchers, records, documents
استناد istinād leaning (الى against or upon); dependence (الى on) │ الى استنادا based on, on the basis of, on the strength of
مسند musnad pl. مساند masānid  (science of Islamic traditions:) a tradition the ascription of which is traceable, in (uninterrupted) ascending order of the traditionaries, to its first authority; mesh; المسند predicate (gram.); اليه المسند subject (gram.)
مستند mustanid relying, in reliance (الى، على on), trusting (على الى، to)
مستند mustanad reason, cause; motive;
-- (pl. -āt) document, paper, deed, legal instrument; voucher, record; receipt; pl. (documentary) proof, records, data; legal evidence (jur.) │ المستندات دار archives, office of public records; الشحن مستندات m. aš-šaḥn bills of lading
 السند as-sind region extending along the lower course and delta of the Indus river; the province of Sind, of West Pakistan, with the capital city Karachi; the inhabitants of this region
سندروس sandarūs sandarac (a resin obtained from the sandarac tree, Callitris quadrivalvis)
سندس sundus silk brocade, sarcenet
سندسي sundusī (made) of silk brocade or sarcenet
above) (see سندال = سندان
سنديان sindiyān (coll.; n. un. ة) evergreen oak, holm oak (Quercus ilex; bot.)
سندياني sindiyānī oaken; like oak. oaky
سنديك (Fr. syndic) sandīk syndic, agent of a corporation
 سنور sinnaur, pl. سنانير sanānīr  cat
  سنارة sinnāra pl. سنانير sanānīr  fishing tackle, fishhook
Sanskrit as-sanskrītīya السنسكريتية
 سنط sanṭ a variety of sant tree (Acacia nilotica; bot.)
  سنطةsanṭa (eg.) wart
سنطور sanṭūr dulcimer (= سنطير) سنطير sinṭīr, sanṭīr psalter; dulcimer سنغافومرة singāfūra Singapore
sinigāl سنغال
سنف sinf (coll.; n. un. m) pod, capsule, hull (bot.)
سنفرة sanfara emery
سنكرى sankarī pl. سناكرة sanākira tinsmith, tinsman, tinner, whitesmith
سنكسار sinaksār synaxarion, martyrologium (Chr.)
سنكة (Turk. süngü) sənge bayonet (syr.)
سنكونا sinkūnā cinchona (bot.)
سنم V to ascend, mount, scale (ھ s.th.) │ تسنم المعالي ذروة (darwat l-ma‘ālī) to attain to greatest honors
سنمة sanama height, summit, peak
سنام sanām pl. اسنمة asnima hump (of the camel)
التسنيم ماء mā’ at-tasnīm the beverage of the blessed in Paradise
تسنم tasannum accession to the throne
مسنم musannam convex, vaulted, arched
 سنمار sinimmār : سنمار جزاء جزاه jazāhu jazā’ s. he repaid him as they had repaid S., i.e., he requited evil with good
 سنمورة sanamūra anchovy; salted and smoked fish
 سنه V to become stale, spoil (food)
 مسانھة musānahatan annually, yearly
 سنا sanā, مكى سنا s. makkī, مكة سنا s. maka (bot.) senna (tree), senna leaflets (pharm.)
 سنو) and سنا (سني sanā u (سناء sanā’) to gleam, shine, glisten, be resplendent, radiate; to flash (lightning) II to facilitate, ease, make easy (ھ s.th.) V to be easy, be possible, be
feasible (ل for or to s.o.), be rendered possible or feasible (ل for s.o.), be put in s.o.’s (ل) power; to rise, be elevated, be exalted
سنى and سنا sanan brilliance, resplendence, splendor, flare, flash, sparkle
سناء sanā’ brilliance, resplendence, splendor, radiance, flash, flare (of lightning); exaltedness, sublimity, majesty, high rank
سني sanīy high, sublime, exalted, splendid more shining, more radiant, more brilliant
سانية sāniya pl. سوان sawānin water scoop
musannayāt مسنيات pl. musannāh مسناة
jetty, dam
سنودس (Gr. σύνοδος) sinōdos synod
سنونو sanūnū swallow (zool.)
سنوي sanawī annual, yearly; سنويا sanawīyan
annually. yearly, per year, per annum
سھب IV to speak at great length, talk in detail ( عن about, of), enlarge, elaborate, expatiate, dilate (عن on)
سھب suhb pl. سھوب suhūb level country; steppe region
اسھاب ishāb elaboration, elaborateness, expatiation, long-windedness, prolixity │ باسھاب elaborately, in detail, at length, lengthily
مسھب mushib, mushab prolix, long- winded, lengthy, detailed, elaborate
سھد sahida a (sahad) to be sleepless, find no sleep n to make sleepless, keep awake, deprive of sleep (ه s.o.) V = I
سھد suhd sleeplessness, insomnia
سھد suhud insomniac
سھاد suhād sleeplessness, insomnia
ساھد sāhid sleepless, awake 436
سھر sahara a (sahar) to be sleepless, find no sleep, pass the night awake (also with الليل); to stay up at night, spend the night ( على in or with some activity); to watch ( على over), guard (على s.o.’s interests, etc.),
 look after (على), attend to (على s.o.’s interests, etc.) │ حفلة في سھر to attend a gathering in the evening or at night IV to make sleepless, keep awake (ه s.o.)
سھر sahar sleeplessness, insomnia; wakefulness, vigil; watchfulness, vigilance (على over) │ سھري عنده طال I spent a long evening with him
سھرة sahra pl. saharāt evening; evening party, evening gathering, evening show or performance, soiree │ ليلية سھرة (lailīya) do.; السھرة (لباس) ثياب evening dress, formal dress
سھران sahrān sleepless, awake, wakeful; watchful, vigilant
سھار suhār sleeplessness, insomnia; wakefulness, vigil
سھار sahhār one who is habitually up and abroad at night, a nighthawk
O اسھر ashar spermatic duct (anat.)
masāhir  مساھر pl. mashar مسھر
nightclub
ساھر sāhir sleepless, awake, wakeful; watchful, vigilant; evening, night, nocturnal, nightly, taking place by night │ ساھرة حفلة (ḥafla) evening party, evening gathering, evening show or performance, soirée
سھف sahifa a (sahaf) to be very thirsty
سھف suhāf violent thirst
سھل sahula u (سھولة suhūla) to be smooth, level, even (ground); to be or become easy, facile, convenient (على for) │ يسھل ال ان hardly ... II to smooth, level, even (ھ the ground); to facilitate, make easy, ease (ل ھ or على for s.o. s.th.); to provide, furnish, supply (ل ھ or على s.o. with facilities); (gram.) to read without hamzah (ھ a word) ill to be indulgent, mild, forbearing, obliging (ه toward s.o.), show ( ه s.o.) one’s good will │ نفسه ساھل (nafsahū) to take liberties IV to purge (med.); to relieve (ھ the constipated bowels, said of a medicine); pass. ushila to be relieved (said of constipated bowels), have a bowel movement, have diarrhea V to be or become easy (ل for) VI to be indulgent, mild, forbearing, obliging, tolerant (مع toward s.o., also ل); to be
negligent, careless (ل in s.th.) X to deem easy, think to be easy (ھ s.th.)
سھل sahl and sāhil smooth, level, even, soft (ground); easy, facile, convenient (على for s.o.); simple, plain; fluent, flowing, facile (style); -- (pl. سھول suhūl) level, soft ground; plain │ االستعمال سھل handy, easy to handle or to use, convenient for use; الھضم سھل s. al-haḍm easily digestible, light; سھل عملة (‘umla) soft currency; كان عليه السھل من to be easy for s.o., come easy to s.o.; وسھال اھال see اھل
O سھلة sahla (proof) planer (typ.)
سھيل suhail Canopus (astron.)
سھل sahūl purgative, laxative, aperient (adj. and n.)
سھولة suhūla easiness, ease, facility, convenience │ بسھولة easily, conveniently
اسھل ashal smoother, evener, leveler; easier; more convenient
تسھيل tashīl pl. -āt facilitation
اسھال ishāl diarrhea
تساھل tasāhul indulgence, mildness, leniency, forbearance, tolerance; carelessness, negligence
مسھل musahhil purgative, laxative, aperient; (pl. -āt) a purgative, a laxative 437
مسھل mushal suffering from diarrhea
متساھل mutasāhil indulgent, mild, lenient, forbearing, tolerant
مستسھل mustashal easy, facile
سھم sahama u (سھوم suhūm) to look grave, have a grave expression III to cast, or draw, lots (ه with s.o.); to participate, take part (في in), partake (في of s.th.), share (في s.th.) IV to give a share (ل في to s.o. in), make s.o. ( ل) share s.th. (في)
سھم sahm pl. سھام sihām, اسھم ashum, سھوم suhūm arrow; dart; -- (pl. اسھم ashum) portion, share, lot; share (of stock); sahme, a square measure of 7.293 m  (Eg.)
founders' اسھم التأسيس rocket; سھم ناري │ al- a. اسھم القرض shares; original shares, حملة األسھم bonds; government bonds, qarḍ نفذ السھم stockholders; shareholders, al-a. ḥ ضرب بسھم مصيب في cast; is die the
 (muṣībin) to take an active part in, participate actively in ...; ونصيب بسھم ضرب في (wa-naṣībin) do.
سھوم suhūm graveness; sadness, mourning
اسھمي ashumī share-, stock- (in compounds)
مساھمة musāhama participation, taking part (في in), sharing (في of) │ المساھمة شركة širkat al-m. joint-stock company, corporation
ساھم sāhim with earnest mien, gravefaced
مسمھم musāhim shareholder, stockholder

سھو) سھا) sahā u (sahw, suhūw) to be inattentive, absent-minded, distracted; to neglect, omit, forget, overlook (عن s.th.) │ عليه سھى suhiya ‘alaihi to be lost in thought
سھو sahw inattentiveness, inattention, inadvertence, absent-mindedness distractedness; negligence, neglectfulness, forgetfulness │ سھوا sahwan inattentively, distractedly, absent-mindedly, heedlessly, negligently; inadvertently, by mistake
سھوة sahwa a kind of alcove
سھوان sahwān  inattentive, heedless, distracted, absent-minded, forgetful
ساه sāhin inattentive, absent-minded, negligent, forgetful │ الھيا ساھيا sāhiyan lāhiyan amusing o.s. in a carefree manner, completely at ease  سوء) ساء) sā’a u (سوء sau’) to be or become bad, evil, foul, wicked; to become worse, deteriorate (condition); to grieve, sadden, afflict, hurt, vex, torment, trouble, offend, pain, make sorry, displease (ه s.o.) │ سبيال ساء (sabīlan) what an evil way (= what an evil practice) this is! ظنا به ساء (ẓannan) to think badly of s.o., have a poor opinion of s.o.; طالعه ساء (ṭāli‘uhū) he was under an evil star, was ill-starred, he was unlucky or unfortunate; يسوءني yasū’unī I am sorry II to do badly, spoil, harm (ھ s.th.); to blame, censure (على ھ s.o. for s.th.); to disapprove (ھ of s.th. على in s.o.), dislike ( ھ على s.th. in s.o.) IV to do badly, spoil,
harm (ھ s.th.); to deal badly (الى with s.o.), act meanly or evilly (الى toward s.o.); to do evil (الى to s.o.), wrong (الى s.o.); to harm (ا لى s.o.), do harm (الى to); to hurt, offend, insult (الى s.o.); to inflict pain (الى on s.o.)
│ التصرف اساء (taṣarrufa) to misbehave, comport o.s. badly; في التصرف اساء to go about ... in an evil manner; به الظن اساء (ẓanna) to think badly of s.o., have a poor opinion of s.o.; التعبير اساء to choose a poor expression, express o.s. poorly; استعماله اساء to misuse, abuse s.th.; معاملته اساء (mu‘āmalatahū) to mistreat s.o., treat s.o. badly; الفھم اساء (fahma) to misunderstand VIII to go through rugged times, fall on evil days; to be unpleasantly affected; to be offended, 438 hurt, annoyed, indignant, upset, angered, displeased (من about, at, by); to be dissatisfied, discontent (من with); to take amiss (من s.th.)
سوء sū’ pl. اسواء aswā’ evil, ill; iniquity, injury, offense; calamity, misfortune │ البخت سوء s. al-bakt misfortune, bed luck; الحظ سوء s. al-ḥaẓẓ do.; الحظ لسوء unfortunately; الخلق سوء s. al-kuluq ill nature, ill-temperedness; الحال سوء bad conditions; الحالة سوء bad situation, predicament; االدارة سوء s. al-idāra mal- administration, mismanagement; سوء السلوك bed behavior, misbehavior, misconduct; الظن سوء s. aẓ-ẓann poor opinion; العالقات سوء bad relations; سوء المعاملة s. al-mu‘āmala mistreatment; سوء االستعمال abuse, misuse; الفھم سوء s. al-fahm misunderstanding; التفاھم سوء s. at-tafāhum mutual misunderstanding, disharmony, discord; القصد سوء s. al-qaṣd evil intent; النية سوء s. an-nīya do.; الھضم سوء s. al- haḍm indigestion
سوءة سوأة، sau’a pl. -āt shame, disgrace; disgraceful act, atrocity; private part, pudendum; pudenda │ لك سوءة (sau’atan) shame on you!
سيء سيئ، sayyi’ bad, evil, ill, foul │ الحظ سيء s. al-ḥaẓẓ unfortunate; unlucky person; الخلق سيء s. al-kuluq ill-natured; التربية سيء s. at-tarbiya bad-mannered, badly brought up; السمعة سيء s. as-sum‘a ill-reputed, disreputable; الطبع سيء s. aṭ- ṭab‘ ill-natured, ill-tempered; الطالع سيء unlucky, unfortunate; unlucky person; من اسوأ الى سيء (aswa’a) from bed to worse
 سيئة sayyi’a pl. -āt sin, offense, misdeed; bed side, disadvantage (of s.th.)
مساءة masā’a pl. مساوئ masāwi’   evil deed, vile action; pl. disadvantages, bad sides, drawbacks, shortcomings
اساءة isā’a misdeed; offense, affront, insult; sin, offeence │ الظن اساءة i. ẓann poor opinion (ب of); المعاملة اساءة i. al- mu’āmala mistreatment, etc., see IV above
استياء istiyā’ dissatisfaction, discontent, indignation, displeasure, annoyance, vexation
مسيء musī’ displeasing, unpleasant, offensive; harmful, disadvantageous, pernicious; insulting
مستاء mustā’ offended, displeased, annoyed, vexed, indignant (من about, at, by); dissatisfied, discontent (من with)
سوى see سواء 
سوارى sawārī horseman, cavalryman, sowar; horsemen, cavalry
سوتيان (Fr. soutien) sūtiyān pl. -āt brassiere
سوتيه (Fr. sauté) sōtēh sautéed  ساج look up alphabetically  اسوجة see سياج
(ساح (سوح sāḥa u to travel, rove, roam about
ساحة sāḥa pl. -āt, ساح courtyard, open square; (open) space; arena; field (fig.) │ الحرب ساحة s. al-ḥarb theater of war; ساحات المحاكم courts, tribunals; القتال ساحة battle field, war zone; القضاء ساحة s. al-qaḍā’ tribunal, forum; األلعاب ساحة athletic field, sports field; ساحته برأ barra’a sāḥatahū to acquit s.o.
سواح sawwāḥ pl. -ūn, traveler, tourist
سائح sā’iḥ pl. -ūn, سياح suyyāḥ, سواح suwwāḥ traveler, tourist; itinerant dervish; anchorite (Chr.)
سوخ) ساخ) sāka u (سوخ sauk) to be or become doughy, soft, slippery (esp. ground), yield like mud; to sink (األرض في in the ground, of the foot) │ روحه ساخت (rūḥuhū) to become faint, swoon 439
 سود II to make black, blacken (ھ s.th.); to draft (ھ a letter, etc.), make a rough draft (
ھ of s.th.); to cover with writing (ھ sheets), scribble (ھ on sheets) │ وجھه سود (wajhahū) to expose s.o., show s.o. up, make a fool of s.o., bring s.o. into disrepute, discredit, disgrace, dishonor s.o.
IX	to be or become black
سواد sawād black color, black, blackness; (pl. اسودة aswida) black clothing, mourning; arable land, tilth; shape, form; inner part, core; majority; multitude │ السواد or العراق سواد the rural areas of Iraq; األعظم السواد the great mass, the great majority, the largest part; سواد الناس the common people, the masses; سواد العين s. al-‘ain eyeball; المدينة سواد suburb, outskirts of the city; الليل سواد s. al-lail the long, dark night
اسود aswad , f. سوداء saudā’ , pl. سود sūd black; dark-colored; -- اسود aswad  pl. سودان sūdān a black, Negro │ (السودان (بالد the Sudan; سوداء شتائم severest reproaches; فاحم اسود coal-black, jet-black
سود saudā’  black bile (one of the four humors of ancient medicine); melancholy, sadness, gloom
سويداء suwaidā’  black bile (one of the four humors of ancient medicine); melancholy, sadness, gloom; السويداء Suweida (capital of the Jebel ed Druz) │ القلب سويداء s. al-qalb the deepest folds of the heart, the inmost
سوداوي saudāwī melancholic, depressed, dejected
(السودان (بالد (bilād) as-sūdān the Sudan
سوداني sūdānī Sudanese; (pl. -ūn) a Sudanese
تسويد taswīd rough draft
مسودة musawwada, muswadda draft, rough copy, rough sketch, notes; day-book
│ الطبع مسودة m. aṭ-ṭab‘ proof sheet, galley proof
 سود) ساد) sāda u (سيادة siyāda, سؤدد su’dud, su’dad) to be or become master, head, chief, chieftain, sovereign, lord, overlord ( ه ھ، of or over people, of or over s.th.), rule, govern (ھ, s.o., s.th.), reign (ه ھ،
over); to prevail (e.g., view), reign (e.g., calm); to be predominant, predominate, have the upperhand (على over) II to make (
 ه s.o.) master, head, chief, chieftain, sovereign, lord, overlord
سيد sayyid pl. اسياد asyād, سادة sāda, سادات sādāt master; gentleman; Mister; Sir; lord, overlord; chief, chieftain; title of Mohammed’s direct descendants │ سيدي (sayyidī, colloq. sīdī) honorific before the names of Muslim Saints (esp. magr.); السيد فالن Mr. So-and-So; فالن سيدي (magr.) do.; األعظم البحار سيد Supreme Commander of the Navy (Eg. 1939)
سيدة sayyida pl. -āt mistress; lady; Mrs.
السيدة wife; his (‘aqīlatuhū) السيدة عقيلته │ So-and-So Mrs. فالنة
سيادة siyāda command, mastery; domination, rule, dominion; supremacy; sovereignty; title and form of address of bishops (Chr.); siyādāt ... (with foll. genit.) nowadays, in Egypt, general title of respect preceding the name, سيادتكم = you, a respectful address introduced after the abolition of titles of rank and social class in Egypt │ المطران سيادة s. al-muṭrān His Eminence the Metropolitan; الرئيس سيادة approx.: His Excellency the President (Eg.); سيادة ذات دولة (daula) sovereign state
سؤدد su’dud, su’dad dominion, domination, rule, reign, power, sovereignty
سائد sā’id prevailing (opinion, feeling, mood, calm, etc.)
440 alphabetically up look السويد، سويدي  
  سادة look up alphabetically and under   سود
سودن saudana to Sudanize (Eg.)
سودنة saudana Sudanization (Eg.)
 سور II to enclose, fence in, wall in, surround with a railing or wall (ھ s.th.) III to leap (ه at s.o.), beset, assail, attack, assault (ه s.o.); to befall, overcome, grip (ه s.o., emotion) V to scale (ھ a wall, a cliff, etc.)
سور sūr pl. اسوار aswār wall; enclosure, fence, railing
سورة sūra pl. سور suwar chapter of the Koran, sura
سورة saura vehemence, force, violence; severity (of cold)
  سوار siwār, suwār pl. سور sūr, اسورة aswira, اساور asāwir , اساورة asāwira bracelet, armlet, bangle; armband; cuff, wristband
  سواريlook up alphabetically
 اسوار look up alphabetically
 سوري sūrī Syrian; (pl. -ūn) a Syrian
(janūbīya) سوريا الجنوبية │ Syria sūriyā سوريا  سوريا do.; (ṣugrā) سوريا الصغرى Palestine; Syria (Greater) (kubrā) الكبرى
سوريا = sūrīya  سورية 
( سوس) ساس sāsa u (سياسة siyāsa) to dominate, govern, rule (ه s.o.): to lead, guide, conduct, direct (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to administer, manage, regulate (ھ s.th.); -- sawisa yaswasu to be or become worm- eaten; to become carious (tooth); to rot, decay (bones) II and V = sawisa
سوس sūs (coll.: n. un. ة) pl. سيسان sīsān
woodworm, borer; mothworm
سوس sūs licorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra; bot.) │ سوس عرق ‘irq s. licorice root; رب سوس rubb as-s. licorice rob, thickened licorice juice
سياسة siyāsa pl. -āt administration, management: p;olicy; سياسة siyāsatan for reasons of expediency (Isl. Law) │ السياسة الدولية (duwalīya) diplomacy; العملية السياسة (‘amalīya) practical policy, Real-politik; O التوسع سياسة s. at-tawassu‘ policy of expansion
سياسي siyāsī political; diplomatic; -- (pl.
-ūn, ساسة sāsa) politician; diplomat, statesman │ السياسية الدوائر political circles; السياسي السلك (silk) diplomatic corps; علم السياسي االقتصاد (‘ilm al-iqtiṣād) political science, political economy
تسوس tasawwus (dental) caries
سائس sā’is pl. ساسة sāsa, سواس suwwās, سياس suyyās stableman, groom; driver (primarily of animals); manager, leader
 السويس as-suwēs Suez (seaport in NE Egypt)
Canal Suez as-s. qanāl قنال السويس │
سوى seeسواسية  
سوسته susta zipper (eg.)
سوسن sausan, sūsan lily of the valley (bot.)
 سوط) ساط) sāṭa u (sauṭ) to whip, flog, lash, scourge (ه s.o.)
siyāṭ سياط aswāṭ, اسواط pl. sauṭ سوط
whip, lash, scourge
مسوط miswaṭ stick or similar implement used for stirring
ساعة sā‘a pl. -āt, ساع sā‘ (short) time, while; hour; timepiece, clock, watch; الساعة the Hour of Resurrection; as-sā‘ata now, at present, by this time, at this moment, in this instant; at once, instantly, immediately, just │ واخرى ساعة بين (wa- ukrā) from hour to hour; الساعة حتى until now; الساعة من from now on, henceforth; ساعته من immediately, presently, instantly, at once; الساعة منذ from now on, henceforth; لساعته مات he died instantly; الجيب ساعة s. al-jaib pocket watch; ساعة ١٤٤ رملية (ramlīya) hourglass; شمسية ساعة (šamsīya) sundial; ساعته ابن ibn sā‘atihī transitory, ephemeral
ساعتئذ sā‘ata’idin in that hour
ساعاتي sā‘ātī pl. -ya watchmaker
سويعة suwai‘a pl. -āt little hour, little while
سوغ) ساغ) sāga u (saug, مساغ masāg) to be easy to swallow, go down pleasantly (drink, food); to be permissible, be permitted, allowed (ل to s.o.); to swallow ( ھ s.th.); to permit, allow, accept, tolerate ( ھ s.th.), put up (ھ with s.th.), swallow, stomach s.th. (ھ, fig.) II to make permissible, permit, allow (ل ھ to s.o. s.th.), admit (ھ s.th.); to justify, warrant ( ھ ب s.th. with); to lease, let (ھ s.th.) IV to wash down, swallow easily (ھ s.th.); (fig.:) to take, swallow, stomach (ھ s.th.), stand for s.th. (ھ), put up with s.th. (ھ) V to lease (ھ s.th.), take a lease (ھ of s.th.) X to regard as easy to swallow, find pleasant (ھ s.th.); to taste, enjoy, relish (ھ s.th.); to approve (ھ of s.th.), admit, grant (ھ s.th.), deem (ھ s.th.) proper
مساغ masāg easy access; possibility; permission │ ل مساغا يستطع لم (yastaṭi‘) he couldn’t put up with ..., couldn’t reconcile himself to ..., couldn’t swallow ...; مساغ ال للشك (masāga, šakk) one cannot possibly doubt it
تسويغ taswīg hiring out on lease, leasing
Act Lease (qarḍ) قانون القرض والتسويغ │ Tun.) (pol.,
سائغ sā’ig easy to swallow; tasty, palatable; permissible, permitted, allowed
مسوغ musawwig pl. -āt justifying factor, justification, good reason
مستساغ mustasāg easy to swallow; tasty, palatable
سوف II to put off (ه s.o.); to postpone, draw out, delay, procrastinate (ھ s.th.)
سوف saufa (abbreviated form س sa) particle of future tense, e.g., ترى سوف (tarā) you will see
مسافة masāfa pl. -āt, مساوف masāwif 
distance, interval, stretch; (mus.) interval
distance some at على مسافة │
تسويف taswīf pl. -āt procrastination, postponement, delay, deferment
تسويفي taswīfī dilatory, delaying, procrastinating
سوفسطائي sūfisṭā’ī sophistic
Soviet sovyēt سوفييت suyāt, سوفيات
sovyētī سوفيتي، سوفييتي sufyātī, سوفياتي the (ittiḥād) االتحاد السوفياتي │ (adj.) soviet Union Soviet
سوق) ساق) sāqa u (sauq, سياقة siyāqa, مساق masāq) to drive, urge on, herd (ه ھ، prisoners, cattle); to draft, conscript (للجندية li-l-jundīya for military service); to drive ( ھ an automobile); to pilot (ھ an airplane); to carry along, convey, transport (ھ s.th.); to send, dispatch, forward, convey, hand over (ھ الى s.th. to s.o.); to utter (ھ s.th.); to cite, quote, propound, put forth (ھ s.th.)
│ مساقه ساق (masāqahū) to follow the example or path of s.o.; الحديث ساق  to carry on the conversation; اليه الحديث ساق to address s.o.; الحديث يساق اليك (yusāqu) you are the one that is meant II to market, sell (ھ merchandise) III to accompany (ه s.o.); to go along, agree (ه with s.o.) V to trade in the market, sell and buy in the market VI to draw out; to form a sequence, be successive, be continuous, be coherent; to harmonize VII to drift; to be driven; to be carried away, be given over │ الى به انساق to carry s.o. away to ..., drive or urge s.o.
 to ... VIII to drive, urge on, herd (ھ cattle) 442
سوق sauq driving (of a car); draft, conscription (للجندية li-l-jundīya for military service); mobilization (of troops, also of forces, energies, etc.) │ السوق اجازة ijāzat as-s. driving license
O سوقية sauqīya strategy
ساق sāqa f., pl. سوق sūq, سيقان sīqān shank; thigh; leg (also geom.); side (geom.); trunk (of a tree); stem, stalk (of plants) │ الحمام ساق s. al-ḥamām bugloss (Anchusa officinalis; bot.); الساق ربطة rabṭat as-s. garter; الساق ربطة وسام Order of the Garter; الساق عظم ‘aẓm as-s. shinbone, tibia; الساقين متساوي mutasāwī s-sāqain isosceles (geom.); ساق على الحرب قامت (ḥarbu) the war was or became violent, flared up; war broke out; عن الحرب كشفت ساقھا (kašafat) do.; ساقه عن األمر كشف the matter became difficult; ل الجد ساق على وقف (s. il-jidd) to turn one’s zeal to, apply o.s. to, exert o.s., make efforts in order to ... ; وساق قدم على (qadam) in full swing, carried on most energetically (undertaking, preparations, etc.); للريح ساقه ارسل arsala sāqahū li-r-rīḥ to speed along like the wind
ساقة sāqa rear guard, arrière-garde
aswāq اسواق pl. f., mostly sūq سوق سوق البر │ fair O market; street; bazaar charity wa-l-iḥsān al-birr s. واالحسان market; free the (ḥurra) السوق الحرة bazaar; سوق خيرية bazaar; charity سوق االحسان the ((aswad) السوق األسود do.; (kairīya) the (muštarak) السوق المشترك market; black an-naqd s. سوق النقد Market; Common اسواق exchange); (stook market money سوق عقود القطن markets; produce المحصوالت
s. ‘uqūd al-quṯn cotton exchange
سوقة sūqa subjects; rabble, mob سوقي sūqī plebeian, common, vulgar سويق sawīq a kind of mush made of
wheat or barley (also with sugar and dates)
سويق suwaiq and سويقة suwaiqa stem, stalk (of plants)
سويقة suwaiqa small market
سياق siyāq succession, sequence, course, thread (of conversation); context
سواق siwāq pl. -ūn driver (of animals); driver, chauffeur; (railroad) engineer
مساق masāq trend of things, course, development, or progress, of s.th.; الى مساقة it amounts to ..., comes to …, winds up in
…, is ultimately aimed at …; also see ساق sāqa above │ الدراسات من مساق course of studies; الى المساق بنا افضى we have come to the point where ...
تسويق taswīq marketing, sale (of merchandise)
تسويقة taswīqa (eg.) bargain, advantageous purchase
تساوق tasāwuq coherence, interrelation, connection, context; harmony
سائق sa’iq driving; driving force; -- pl.
-ūn sāqa) driver (of animals); chauffeur, driver; (aircraft) pilot
مسوقر musauqar (tun.) = مسوكر musaukar
سوك) ساك) sāka u (sauk) to rub, scrub, scour (ھ s.th.) II to clean and polish, brush, clean ( االسنان the teeth)
سواك siwāk pl. سوك sūk a small stick (the tip of which is softened by chewing or beating) used for cleaning and polishing the teeth
= masāwīk  مساويك pl. miswāk مسواك
سواك
سوكر saukara to insure (ھ goods, etc.); to register (ھ a letter)
سوكر musaukar insured; registered (letter) 443
 سول II to talk or argue s.o. (ل) into s.th. evil or fateful (ھ); to entice, seduce (ل s.o., said of the Devil) │ نفسه له سولب (nafsuhū) he let himself be seduced (ھ to)
  تسول tasawwala (for تساءل tasā’ala) to beg تسول tasawwul begging, beggary متسول mutasawwil pl. -ūn beggar
  سوم) سام) sāma u (saum) to offer for sale (ھ a commodity); to impose (ه ھ upon s.o. a punishment or task), force (ه ھ upon s.o. a difficult task); to demand of s.o. (ه) s.th. ( ھ) beyond his power │ خسفا سامه(kasfan)
 to treat s.o. unjustly, wrong s.o.; to humiliate s.o.; -- (سيامة siyāma) to ordain, consecrate (a priest, a bishop, etc.; Chr.) II to impose, force (ھ ه upon s.o. a difficult task), coerce (ھ ه s.o. to s.th. difficult); to demand of s.o. (ه) s.th. (ھ) beyond his power; to assess estimate (ھ the value of an object); to mark, provide with a mark ( ھ s.th.) ill to bargain, haggle, chaffer over a price (ه with s.o.); to bargain, haggle (في or ب على، with s.o. over) IV to let (ھ cattle) graze freely; to let (ھ the eye) wander VI to bargain, haggle (في over, for) VID to bargain, haggle, chaffer ( or على في، over, for)
مساومة musāwama pl. -āt bargaining, haggling
سائمة sā’ima pl. سوائم sawā’im  freely grazing livestock
 سامي سام، look up alphabetically
سم  see مسام، مسامات 
سومر sūmir Sumer
سومطرة sūmaṭra Sumatra
اسوان look up alphabetically
سوھج sōhag Sohag (city in central Egypt, on the Nile)
سوي sawiya a to be equivalent, be equal (ھ to s.th.), equal (ھ s.th.) II to even, level, nivellate, flatten, straighten (ھ s.th.); to smooth (ھ s.th.); to smooth down (ھ s.th., e.g., folds, wrinkles; ثيابه من one’s clothes); to equalize, make equal (ھ ب s.th. to s.th. else), put (ھ s.th.) on the same level (ب with s.th.); بينھما سوى to put two persons on an equal footing, treat two persons as equals, reconcile two persons; to make regular, make good (ھ s.th.); to cook properly (ھ s.th.); to regulate, arrange, make up, smooth over, settle, put in order (ھ a dispute, a controversy, etc.) │ سوى اخدعه to crush s.o.’s pride III to be equivalent, be equal (ھ to s.th.), equal (ھ s.th.); to be worth (ھ s.th.); to equalize, make equal (ھ ب s.th. to s.th. else), put (ھ s.th.) on the same level (ب with); to establish equality (وبين -- بين between -- and); بينھم ساوى to make them equals, equalize them, put them on the same footing; to regulate, arrange, make up,
smooth over, settle, put in order (ھ a dispute, a controversy, etc.); = بينھما ساوى بينھما سوى (sawwā) VI to be equal or similar; to be balanced, keep the balance VIII to be even, regular, equal; to be equivalent (ھ to); to be on the same level; to be or become straight, even, level; to stand upright, erect, straight; to straighten up; to sit down (على on), mount (على s.th.); to sit firmly (على on an animal); to be properly cooked, be well done; to ripen, mature, be or become ripe
سوى siwan, suwan equality, sameness; (with foll. genit. or suffix) other than, except │ سوي حد على (ḥaddin) equal(ly), indiscriminate(ly), alike, the same; فضله سواه على faḍḍalahū ‘alā siwāhu he preferred him to everybody else; سوى، -- ال سوى -- ليس only, nothing but
سواء sawā’ equal; equality, sameness; sawā’a except │ شيء كل لديه سواء (ladaihi) 444 it is all the same to him, he is indifferent to everything; بسواء سواء (sawā’an) equally, indiscriminately, without distinction; together; السواء على likewise, in like manner, equally, evenly, indiscriminately, without distinction; all the same, making no difference; على سواء it doesn’t make any difference for ...; – سواء او) ام) (sawā’an) regardless whether --
or ..., no matter whether -- or ..., be it
تالميذ سقراط سواء do.; سواء -- ام ..., or - ... that of disciples the منھم األثينيون وغير األثينيين non- and Athenians both Socrates, )سواء السبيل )المحجة Athenians; path right straight, the (Muhammaḍajja)
سوي sawīy pl. اسوياء aswiyā’ straight; right, correct, proper; unimpaired, intact, sound; straight-bodied, straight-shaped, of regular build or growth; even, regular, well-proportioned, shapely, harmonious; سويا sawīyan in common, jointly, together
سوية sawīya pl. سوايا sawāyā equality;
sawīyatan together, jointly
سي siyy (for m. and f.) pl. اسواء aswā’ equal, similar, (a)like │ سيان ھما they are alike, are the same; عندي سيان ھما they are both the same to me
سيما ال lā sīyamā especially, in particular, mainly
 سواسية sawāsiya (pl.) equal, alike │ ھم سواسية (ھن) they are equals
تسوية taswiya leveling, nivellation; settlement, arrangement, adjustment (of controversies, etc.); equalization; settlement (of a bill) │ التسوية تحت outstanding, unsettled, āunpaid (com.)
مساواة musāwāh equality, equivalence; equal rights, equality before the law; settlement, composition (com.)
تساو tasāwin equality, equivalence, sameness; equal rights, equality before the law │التساوي على or بالتساوي likewise, in like manner, equally, evenly, regularly
استواء istiwā’ straightness; evenness, levelness; equality, regularity, steadiness
equator al-ist. kaṭṭ خط االستواء│
│ tropical equatorial, istiwā’ī استوائي المناطق االستوائية or (minṭaqa) المنطقة االستوائية tropics the
مساو musāwin equal, equivalent, similar
متساو mutasāwin equal, similar, (a)like; even, equable, equally strong; of equal weight, equipoised, equiponderant │ األبعاد متساوى equidistant; الزوايا متساوى m. z- zawāyā equiangular (geom.); الساقين متساوى
m. s-sāqain isosceles (geom.); متساوى االضالع equilateral (geom.)
مستو mustawin straight, upright, erect; even, smooth, regular; well done (cooking); ripe, mature
مستوى mustawan level, niveau, standard
│ الماء مستوى water level;  العلمي المستوى (‘ilmī) scientific level; الحياة مستوى m. l- ḥayāh standard of living; مستوى في (with foll. genit.) on an equal level or footing with ...
السويد (Fr. la Suède) as-suwīd Sweden
سويدي suwīdī Swede; Swedish
السويس as-suwēs Suez (seaport in NE Egypt) │ السويس (قنال) قناة (qanāt, qanāl) Suez Canal
سويسرا (It. Svizzera) swiserā Switzerland
سويسري swiserī Swiss
 سية siya pl. -āt curved part of a bow
 □ سي sī short form of سيد sayyid, سيدي Mr., Sir (esp. magr.)
سوي see سيان siyy, سي 
سيام siyām Siam, Thailand
سيان siyān cyanogen 445
سيب) ساب) sāba i (saib) to flow, stream, run (water); to run along, speed along, glide along, creep along, crawl along; to walk fast, hurry; (eg.) to leave, give up, relinquish (ھ s.th.); (eg.) to neglect (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); (eg.) to release, let go, free (ھ، ه s.o., s.th.) II to leave, give up, relinquish (ھ s.th.); to neglect (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to release, let go, free (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) VII to flow, stream, run (water); to pour, flow ( الى into), enter (الى s.th.); to peter out, seep away, exhaust itself; to speed along, glide along, run along, crawl or creep (along); to glide, slip (بين between); to walk fast, hurry; with foll. imperf.: to begin at once to do s.th.
Š-šakl ins. انسيابي الشكل  insiyābī, انسيابي
stream-lined
سائب sā’ib forlorn, lost, (a)stray; free, loose, lax, unrestrained
سيبيريا sībīriyā Siberia
  سيج II to fence in, hedge in, surround with a hedge (ھ s.th.) V pass. of II
سياج siyāj pl. -āt, اسوجة aswija, اسياج asyāj; hedge; fencing, fence; enclosure; (fig.) bulwark, shield (of a country, of a nation)
 ساج look up alphabetically
سيجار sīgār cigar (eg.)
سجائر sagāyir, سجاير -āt, pl. sīgāra سيجارة
sagā’ir  cigarette (eg.)
سيح) ساح) sāḥa i (saiḥ, سيحان sayaḥān) to flow, run (water); to melt, thaw, dissolve, become liquid (snow, metal); --(saiḥ, سياحة siyāḥa) to travel, journey; to rove, roam about II to make flow, cause to flow (ھ a river, etc.); to melt, dissolve, liquefy, smelt, fuse (ھ metal, and the like); to melt, clarify (ھ butter) IV to make flow, cause to flow (ھ s.th.) VII to spread, pour forth
سياحة siyāḥa pl. -āt travel; tourism
سياح sayyāḥ pl. -ūn traveler; tourist
 سائح sā’iḥ pl. -ūn, سياح suyyāḥ, suwwāḥ) traveler; tourist; itinerant dervish; anchorite (Chr.)
مسيخ musayyak fluid, liquid; striped (garment)
 سيخ) ساخ) sāka i (سيخ saik, سيخان sayakān) to sink into the ground or mud
 سيخ sīk pl. اسياخ asyāk spit, skewer; foil, rapier; iron prong or bolt
سود  see سيد، سيادة
سيدارة sīdāra pl. -āt (see سدارة) an Iraqi headgear, commonly of black velvet; overseas cap
سير) سار) sāra i (سير sair, سيرورة  sairūra, مسير masīr, مسيرة masīra, تساير tasāyara) to move (on), set out, strike out, start, get going; to move along; to march; to travel, journey; to ride (in a vehicle); to go, go away, leave, depart; to run, operate (و -- بين between -- and, of a train); to flow (electric current); to run, be in operation, function, work, go (machine); to progress (e.g., work); to make (الى for s.th.), be headed (الى for s.th.), approach (الى s.th.), be directed, be oriented (الى toward s.th.); to circulate, make the rounds, be or become current (proverb); to follow, maintain (سيرا sairan a behavior, على s.th.); to behave, conduct o.s.; to proceed, act (على or بمقتضى bi-muqtaḍā according to) │ به سار to lead s.o., lead s.o. away; سار وراءه to (allow, pursue s.o.; وذھابا جيئة سار (jī’atan wa-dihāban) to walk up and down, go back and forth; التحسن سبيل في سار (s. it-taḥassun) to be on the road to recovery; فيھا سار التى الخطة (kiṭṭa) the course he followed; ٦٤٤ حسنة سيرة سار (sīratan ḥasanatan) to behave well; سار قدميه على (qadamaihi) not to be dead and forgotten, be still much alive, be a tangible reality II to set in motion, drive ( ھ s.th.); to make (ھ s.th., e.g., an automobile) go; to start, start up, let run ( ھ a machine); to go in (ھ for a task), run, carry on, ply, practice (ھ a trade); to drive (ھ a car), pilot, steer (ھ s.th.); to send, dispatch, send out (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to circulate, put in circulation (ھ s.th.); to stripe (ھ a garment, etc.) III to keep up, go along (ه with s.o.); to walk at s.o.’s (ه) side; to pursue (ھ s.th.); to show o.s.
willing to please (ه s.o.), comply (ه with s.o.’s wish); to be in agreement, be consistent (ھ with s.th.); to be familiar, intimate, be hand in glove, get along (ه with s.o.); to adapt o.s. (ھ to circumstances, events, etc.) IV to set in motion, drive (ھ s.th.); to send, dispatch ( ه ھ، s.o., s.th.)
سير sair trip, tour, travel, journey, walk, errand, march, procession; movement, motion; departure; course, progress (of an undertaking); procedure, practice, conduct, behavior; (way of) life; observance, pursuance (على of s.th.) │ حسن والسلوك السير(husk as-s.) blameless life; في غرضه وراء السير (garaḍihī) in pursuance of his intention
سير sair pl. سيور suyūr (leather) belt; girth; drive belt, transmission belt │ سير متحرك(mutaḥarrik) conveyor belt, assembly line
سيرة saira gait; course
سيرة sīra pl. سير siyar conduct, comportment, demeanor, behavior, way of life; attitude, position, reaction, way of acting; (in sg. or pl.) biography, history; pl. campaigns; السيرة the biography of Mohammed
سيار sayyār traveling frequently, always on the move, continually moving; itinerant, roving, roaming about; circulating; planet │سيارة صحف (suḥuf) or سيارة جرائد daily newspapers, dailies
│ car automobile, -āt pl. sayyāra سيارة سيارة مدرعة cab; taxi al-ujra s. سيارة األجرة سيارة دورية car; armored (mudarra‘a) al- s. سيارة اإلسعاف car; patrol (daurīya) (muṣaffaḥa) سيارة مصفحة ambulance; is‘āf truck, an-naql s. سيارة النقل car; armored driver, (automobile) سائق السيارة lorry; chauffeur
مسار masār pl. -āt path (of rays, etc.)
مسير masīr travel, journey, tour; march (mil.); departure; distance
مسيرة masīra travel, journey, tour; departure; distance
تسيير tasyīr dispatch, sending out; propulsion, drive (techn.) │النفاثي التسيير (naffātī) jet propulsion
 مسايرة musāyara adaptation, adjustment
سائر sā’ir going, walking, running; walker, wayfarer, wanderer; generally known, current (proverb); see also سئر سائرة خدمة│ (kidma) transient laborers, seasonal laborers (eg.)
مسير musayyar directed, controlled (ب by); guided, remote-controlled; not endowed with free will (philos., as opposed to مخير mukayyar)
سيراس sīrās (syr.) glue made of the yellow powder of a pulverized root, used esp. for pasting leather
سيرافيم sīrāfīm seraphim
سيرج sīraj sesame oil
سيرك (Fr. cirque) sirk circus
سيسبان saisabān sesban (an indigenous Egyptian shrub whose leaves have a purgative 447 effect, Sesbania aegyptiaca Pers.; bot.)
سيسى sīsī pl. سيسيات sīsīyāt, سياسي sayāsī (eg.) pony; young rat
سيطر saiṭara to command, dominate, control ( على s.th.); to be master or lord (على over s.th.), reign, gain power (على over s.th.); to seize (على s.th.), take hold (على of s.th.) II tasaiṭara = سيطر
سيطرة saiṭara rule, dominion, domination, command, supremacy, power, authority (على over); decisive influence ( على on); control (على over)
مسيطر musaiṭir ruler, sovereign, overlord
asyuf اسيف asyāf, اسياف suyūf, سيوف pl. saif سيف
sword; sabre, foil, rapier │اإلسالم سيف s.
al-islām title of princes of the royal house of Yemen
سيف sīf pl. اسياف asyāf shore, coast
سياف sayyāf executioner
مسايفة musāyafa fencing (with saber or foil)
سيقارة = سيكارة
سيكارة sigāra pl. سكائر sagā’ir   cigarette (syr.)
سيكران saikurān, saikarān henbane (Hyoscyamus niger; bot.)
│ insurance sikurtāh sicurtà) (It. سيكورتاه (life) fire (ḥayā) )سيكورتاه الحريق )الحياة insurance
سيكولوجى sīkolōžī, saikolōjī psychologic(al)
 سيل) سال) sāla i (sail, سيالن sayalān) to flow, stream; to be or become liquid; to melt │ على لعابه سال (lu’ābuhū) his mouth watered for ... II to make flow, cause to stream, liquefy, melt, dissolve (ھ s.th.) IV = II
سيل sail pl. سيول suyūl flood, inundation; torrent, torrential stream │سيل عرام (‘urām) huge mass, flood, stream; بلغ الزبى السيل (zubā) the matter has reached its climax, has come to a head
سيلة saila stream
سيولة suyūla liquid state, liquidity, flow(ing)
سيال sayyāl streaming, pouring, torrential; fluid, liquid; a liquid; stream; a fluid │سيال قلم (qalam) facile pen, fluent style
سيالة sayyāla rivulet; pocket
سيالن sayalān flowing, ftow; running; deliquescence, liquefaction; gonorrhea (med.); see also below
مسيل masīl pl. مسايل masāyil  river bed, rivulet
سائل sā’il ftuid, liquid; (pl. سوائل sawā’il ) a liquid, a fluid │O السوائل علم ‘ilm as-s. hydraulics
سائلية sā’ilīya fluidity, liquid state of aggregation (phys.)
 سيالن sayalān  Ceylon;
 سيالن sīlān garnet (precious stone)
 سيم sīmā (pass.) and VII to be consecrated, be ordained (Chr.)
سوى see siyyamā wa-lā وال سيما 
 سيماء see next entry
 سيمى sīmā (سيما sīmā), سيماء sīmā’ , سيمة sīma pl. سيم siyam mark, sign, characteristic; mien, expression
 سيميا sīmiyā, سيمياء sīmiyā’ natural magic
سين sīn name of the letter س
rays S as-sīnīya al-aši‘‘a االشعة السينية
 سينا sīnā and سيناء sīnā’ Sinai 448
motion-picture cinema, cinéma) (Fr. سينما motionpicture as.s. dūr دور السينما │ theater silent )سينما صامتة )صامت movies; theaters, )سينما صائتة )صائت or )سينما ناطقة )ناطق film; talkie film, sound
سينمائي sīnēmā’ī cinematographic, cinematic, cinema-, movie- (in compounds); motion-picture actor, film star │سينمائية رواية motion picture, film, movie
سينماتوغراف (Fr. cinématographe) sīnimatugrāf
cinematograph
سينماسكوب (Fr. cinémascope) sīnimaskūb
cinemascope
سينودس (Gr. σύυδος) sinōdos synod

ش

ش abbreviation of شارع šāri‘ street (St.)
شياه šiwāh, شواة pl. šāh) شاة un. n. (coll.; šā’ شاء
šiyāh sheep; ewe
شؤبوب šu’būb pl. شآبيب ša’ābīb  downpour, shower
شادر šādir, tent; storehouse, warehouse, magazine
شاذرون šādarūn fountain; a small water-driven gadget adorned with hells, and the like, resembling a mobile
شاروبيم šārūbīm cherubim
شاسي šāsī chassis
شأفة ša’fa root │شأفته استأصل ista’ṣala ša’fatahū to extirpate, root out, eradicate s.th., remove s.th. drastically
شواكيش pl. šakūš شكوش and šākūš شاكوش hammerhead ابو شاكوش│ hammer šawākīš (shark)
شال šāl pl. شيالن šīlān shawl
شاليه (Fr. chalet) šālēh pl. -āt hunting cabin,
.hooting lodge; beach cabin, cabana
شام VI to perceive an evil omen (من or ب in), regard as an evil portent (من or ب ب s.th.); to foretell calamity (من or ب from); to be superstitious; to he pessimistic X to
perceive an evil omen (ب in), regard as an evil portent (ب s.th.); to foretell calamity ( ب from)
الشام aš-ša’m, aš-šām the northern region, the North; Syria; Damascus │شاما ويمنا (yamanan) northward and southward
شامي šāmī Syrian; (pl. -ūn, شوام (šuwām) a Syrian
شآمي ša’āmī Syrian (adj. and n.)
شؤم šu’m calamity, bad luck, misfortune; evil omen, portent │الدنيا تمأل ال شؤما (tamla’, dunyā) (don’t fill the world with evil omen!) approx.: talk of the devil and he will appear!
اشأم aā’am , f. شؤمى šu’mā inauspicious, ill-omened, ominous, portentous, sinister; calamitous, disastrous; unfortunate, fatal, accursed
تشائم tašā’um pessimism
مشائيم pl. mašūm مشوم and maš’ūm مشؤوم
mašā’īm  inauspicious, ill-omened,
ominous, sinister; unfortunate, unlucky
│مشؤوم عدد (‘adad) unlucky number
متشائم mutašā’im pessimist
شأن ša’n pl. شؤون šu’ūn matter, affair, concern, business; circumstances, state of affaire, case; nature, character, quality, 449 kind; situation, condition, state; significance; importance, consequence; standing, prestige, rank; cranial future; pl. شؤون tears; ša’na like, as │بشأن bi-ša’ni regarding, with regard or respect to, relating to, pertaining to, concerning, as to, about; شأنه جل (jalla) the Sublime (of God); االجتماعية الشؤون وزارة Ministry of Social Affairs; الخارجية الشؤون (kārijīya)foreign affairs; الشأن ذو, f. ذات الشأن the responsible man, the man in charge, the man directly concerned with the matter; الشأن اولو ulū š-š. and الشأن ذوو dawū š-š. the influential people, the competent people; the concerned with the matter; الحياة شؤون š. al-ḥayāh worldly affairs; الشأن خطير of great importance; ذو شأن significant, important; الشأن رفيع high- ranking; (formerly, Tun.) title of members of the Bey’s family; الشأن صاحب the one concorned; الشأن اصحاب those concerned; the important, influential people; O مكلف
 بالشؤون (mukallaf) chargé d’affaires (dipl.); ال شأن ذلك في شأنه... (ša’nuhū … ša’nu l-...) in this matter he fares just as the …, he is, in this respect, in the same situation as
the ...; شأنه ھذا رجل (ša’nuhū) a man whose situation is this, a man who can be described as ..., a man in this situation; شأنك ša’naka or وشأن انت anta wa-ša’naka please your-self! do as you like! وما شأنك تريد (ša’naka) do as you please! just as you wish! وشأني دعني (da‘nī) let me alone! تركه وشأنه tarakahū wa-ša’nahū to let s.o. alone; to let s.o. go; not to pay any attention to s.o.; شأن في ھو he is concerned with a matter; شأنه ھذا that’s his affair; ما شأنك what’s the matter with you? what do you want? وھذا شأنك ما what have you got to do with this? what business of yours is this? واألمر شأنه ما (amra) what has he got to do with the matter? ذلك في شأني ما what have I got to do with that? what business of mine is that? ھذا في لك شأن اي (ayyu ša’nin) what business of yours is this? what’s that to you? ذلك في شأن له he has s.th. to do with this, he has a hand in this; ذلك في له شأن ال (ša’na) he hasn’t anything to do with this, he has no part in this; ليس ذلك في شأن لي I shall have nothing to do with that, that is none of my business, I shan’t meddle in that; ذلك في لي شأن ال (ša’na) I haven’t anything to do with it, it's none of my business; آخر شأن معه لي (ākar) I still have a bone to pick with him; شأنه لبعض ذھب (li-ba‘ḍi ša’nihī) he attended to a task; he went to do s.th.; الى انصرف شأنه (inṣarafa) he left to do his work;
شأنھا من اصلحت (aṣlaḥat) she made herself up; شأنه اھمل ahmala ša’nahū he neglected him; شأنه ذلك that is his habit; دائما شأنه ھذا he is always that way; في شأنه (ša’nahū) as he used to do in ...; من مع شأنه ... (ša’nahū) as he used to deal with people who ...; كان شأنه من it was his wont, he used to ...; من ان شأنه it is in his (its) nature that ..., he (it) tends to ...; it is his business to ...; من ليس ان شأنه it is not his affair or business to ...;
it is inappropriate for him to ...; it does not tend to …; is not conducive to ...; لھذا ان شأنا الرجل (rajuli) there is a man to keep an eye on, this is an important man; there is s.th. about this
man! شؤون خلقه في <I (kalqihī) God has created all kinds of things (meaning: strange things can happen in this world!)
شانتاج (Fr. chantage) šantāž blackmail
شاه šāh shah; king (chess) │ بلوط شاه (ballūṭ) chestnut tree (bot.); مات شاه checkmate (chess)
شاھاني šāhānī the shah’s, pertaining to the shah; imperial │ شاھانية ارادة decree of the Sultan (in Ottoman times)
شاھين šāhīn pl. شواھين šawāhīn  shahin, an Indian falcon (zool.) 450 شأو) شآ) šā’a u ( شأو ša’w) to overtake in running, outrace (ه s.o.)
شأو ša’w highest point, summit, peak; goal, object │ الشأو بعيد far-aiming, far- aspiring; very ambitious; شأوه في بلغ (ša’wihī) to get as far in s.th. as s.o. else, match s.o. in s.th.; الرقي في بعيدا شأوا بلغ (ruqīy) to undergo tremendous progress; البعيد الشأو بلغ to carry off the prize, hit the bull’s eye
شاورمة šāwarma, šāwirma (also شورمة) charcoal-broiled mutton, out in thin slices and arranged conically on a vertical skewer (syr.)
شاوش šāwuš (tun.) pl. شواش šuwwāš sergeant; office boy, handy man; doorman, gate- keeper
شاويش šāwīš a military rank, approx.: staff sergeant (Eg.) │ شاويش وكيل a military rank, approx.: sergeant (Eg.)
شاي šāy tea
شب šabba i (شباب šabāb, شبيبة šabība) to become a youth or young man, to adolesce, grow up; -- i u (شب šibāb, شبيب šabīb) to raise the forelegs as if about to jump; to rear; to prance (horse); -- i (شبوب šubūb) to burn, blaze (fire); to break out (fire, war); -- u (šabb, šubūb) to light, kindle (ھ fire) │ الحرب نيران شبت (nīrān al- ḥarb) war broke out; الطوق عن شب (ṭauq) to be over the initial stages, with neg.: to be still in its infancy II to rhaplodize about a beloved woman (بھا) and one’s relationship to her, celebrate her in verse; to flirt (بھا with a woman) V to rhaplodize about a beloved woman (بھا) end one’s relationship to her, celebrate her in verse;
 to compose love sonnets; to take fire, blaze up
شب šabb (= شاب šābb) youth, young man
شب šabb alum
شبة šabba (= šābba) young woman, girl
شبة šabba alum
شبب šabab fully grown (steer)
شباب šabāb youth, youthfulness; youths, young men, adolescents, juveniles │ تجديد الشباب rejuvenation
شبابي šabābī youthful, juvenile شبوب šubūb outbreak (of a war) شبابة šabbāba reed flute
شبيبة šabība youth, youthfulness; الشبيبة
the youth (coll.)
شاب šābb pl. شبان šubbān, شباب šabāb, شببة šababa youthful, juvenile, young; youth, young man
شبائب šawābb , شواب -āt, pl. šābba شابة
šabā’ib  young woman, girl
مشبوب mašbūb lighted, kindled, ignited, flaming, burning; beautiful
شبت šibitt dill (ھnethum graveolens; bot.)
 شبث šabita a (šabat) and V to cling, cleave, hold fast, hang on, attach o.s. adhere (ب to)
شبث šabat pl. شبثان šibtān spider
شبث tašabbut tenacity; attachment, adherence, fidelity; stubbornness, obstinacy
متشبث mutašabbit tenacious; attached, adherent; stubborn, obstinate
 شبث šibitt (ھnethum graveolens; bot.)
شبح šabaḥ pl. شبوح šubūḥ, اشباح ašbāḥ blurred, indistinct shape; apparition; phantom; ghost, specter, spirit; nightmare; figure, person
 شبر šabara u i (šibr) to measure (ھ s.th.) with the span of the hand II do.; to gesticulate, make gestures, to gesture
شبر šibr pl. اشبار ašbār span of the hand
│ فشبرا شبرا (fa-šibran) inch by inch; 451
قلده ground; of foot a (arḍ) شبر من األرض
imitate to (qalladahū) شبرا بشبر وذراعا بذراع
s.o. or s.th. religiously; to follow s.th. literally
  شبور šabbūr pl. شبابير šabābīr  trumpet
  شبورة šabbūra and شابورة šābūra (eg.) fog, mist
شبرق šabraqa to tear to pieces, to shred (ھ s.th.)
شبرقة šabraqa pocket money
شبشب šibšib pl. شباشب šabāšib  slipper
  شبط šabaṭa to cling, cleave, hold on (في to)   شباط šubāṭ  February (Syr., Ir., Leb., Jord.)   شبوط šabbūṭ (syr.) large fish found in the
Euphrates and Tigris rivers
شبع šabi‘a a (šab‘, šiba‘) to satisfy one’s appetite (من or ھ with s.th.), eat one’s fill ( من or ھ of s.th.); to be or become sated, satisfied in one’s appetite; to be full (من or ھ of); to be or become fed up, surfeited ( من with), be or become sick and tired (من of), have enough (من of) II to sate, satiate, fill (ه ھ، ب، s.o., s.th. with); to satisfy, gratify (ھ the appetite, one’s desires, the senses); to load, charge (ھ s.th., ب with electricity) IV to sate, satiate, fill (ب ه s.o. with); to satisfy, gratify (ھ the appetite, the senses); to saturate (ھ s.th., e.g., with a dye); to load, charge (ھ s.th., ب with electricity); to go in (ھ for s.th.) thoroughly; (gram.) to lengthen (ھ a vowel) by writing it plane; pass. ušbi‘a to be replete, full (ب with, of) │ فيه الكالم اشبع (kalāma) to speak in great detail, at great length about s.th., describe or explain s.th. elaborately; ضربا اشبعه (ḍarban) to give
s.o. a sound beating V to be sated, saturated (ب with); to be filled (ب with), be full (ب of); to be loaded or charged (ب with, el.)
شبع šab‘ sufficiency, satiety, satiation, saturation, repletion, fullness
شبع šib‘, šiba‘ s.th. that fills or satisfies the appetite, fill
شبع šaba‘ saturation (chem.)
شبعة šub‘a fill
 شبعان šab‘ān f. شبعى šab‘ā, pl. شباعي šabā‘ā, شباع šibā‘ sated, satisfied, full; rich
اشباع išbā‘ satiation, saturation, repletion, filling; satisfaction, gratification
مشبع mušabba‘, mušba‘ satiated, saturated (ب with); replete, filled (ب with), full (ب of) │ بالكھرباء مشبع (kahrabā’) electrically charged
  شبق šabiqa a (šabaq) to be lewd, lecherous, lustful
شبق šabaq lewdness, lechery, licentiousness, lust
شبق šabiq lewd, lecherous, lustful, licentious
  شبق šubuq chibouk
  شبك šabaka i (šabk) to interjoin, intertwine, interlace, interweav., entangle (ھ s.th.); to fasten, tighten, attach (ھ s.th. or في to) II to interjoin, intertwine, interlace, interweave, entangle, complicate (بين or ھ s.th.); to crochet V to be interjoined, intertwined, interlaced, interwoven, entangled; to b. or become complicated, involved, intricate, confused VI to be intertwined, interlaced, interwoven, entangled; to be intermeshed, be interwoven like a net VIII to be or become interjoined, interlaced, interwoven, net- like, reticulate; to be intertwined (branches), be interlocked (hands); to be or become entangled, snarled; to get entangled, involved, ensnared, embroiled, implicated, mixed up (في in); to com. to blows or to gripe 452 (ب or مع with s.o.); to be or become complicated, involved, intricate, confused (matter); to join, unite, combine, coalesce, merge, fuse (ب with); to meet (eyes, glances) │ حديث في اشتبك to be drawn into a conversation, become engrossed in a discussion; حرب في اشتبك (ḥarb) to become involved in a war
شبكة šabaka pl. شبك šabak, شباك šibāk, شبوكات šubūkāt net; netting, network; snare; -- (pl. شباك šibāk) O grid (radio) شائكة شبكة barbed-wire entanglement, concertina; السلكية شبكة (lā-silkīya) radio network
شبكي šabakī reticulate, reticular, netted, net-like; retinal; of framework
شبكية šabakīya retina (anat.)
شباك šubbāk pl. شبابيك šabābīk  netting, network; plaitwork; grid, grill; window; wicket (post office, box office, etc.) │ العرض شباك š. al-‘arḍ show window, showcase, glass case
مشبك mišbak pl. مشابك mašābik  hook; clasp, pin; hairpin, bobby pin │ الورق مشبك
m. al-waraq paper clip
تشابك tašābuk confusion, intricacy, obscurity, abstruseness
اشتباك ištibāk entanglement, involvement (في in); complication; hand- to-hand fight, scuffle, melee (مع with), clash (ب with) │ القتال في االاشتباك عدم (‘adam al-išt.) nonintervention in battle
مشبك mušabbak plaited, resembling plaitwork; (pl. -āt) window (or door) adorned with plaited latticework
مشتبك muštabik entangled, involved, complicated, intricate
مشتبك muštabak plaitwork; thicket (of branches)
 شبك šubuk chibouk
  شوبك look up alphabetically
شبل IV to take care (على of s.o.), look (على after s.o.), take s.o. (على) in hand
شبل šibl pl. اشبال ašbāl lion cub
شبين šabīn, šibin pl. شباين šabāyin  godfather, sponsor (Chr.); best man, groomsman (Chr.)
شبينة šabīna, šibīna pl. -āt godmother, sponsor (Chr.); bridesmaid (Chr.)
اشبين išbīn pl. اشابين ašābīn  godfather, sponsor (Chr.); best man, groomsman (Chr.)
اشبينة išbīna godmother, sponsor (Chr.); bridesmaid (Chr.)
شبه II to make equal or similar (ب or ھ ھ s.th. to s.th. else); to compare (ھ ب s.th. with), liken (ھ ب s.th. to); pass. šubbiha to be doubtful, dubious, uncertain, obscure ( على to s.o.) III to resemble (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), bear a resemblance, be similar (ه ھ، to
 s.o., to s.th.), be like s.o. or s.th. (ه ھ،), look (exactly) like s.o. (ذلك شابه وما │ (ه and the like IV to resemble (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), bear a resemblance, be similar (ه ھ، to s.o., to s.th.), be like s.o. or s.th. (ه ھ،); to look (exactly) like s.o. (ذلك اشبه وما │ (ه and the like V to compare o.s. (ب with); to imitate, copy (ب s.o., s.th.) VI to resemble one another, be similar to one another; to be equal to one another, be identical; to be ambiguous, unclear VIII to resemble one another, be similar to one another; to be in doubt (في about), doubt (في s.th.); to suspect (امره في or في s.o., s.th.); to be doubtful, dubious, obscure (على to s.o.) │ األمر في اشتبه the matter appeared doubtful to him
شبه šibh pl. اشباه ašbāh resemblance, similarity, likeness; image, picture; analogue; similar, (a)like; -like, quasi-, semi- (with foll. genit.) │ شبه šibhu jazīratin peninsula; حربي شبه š. ḥarbī semi- military; المنحرف شبه š. al-munḥarif 453 trapezoid (geom.); رسمي شبه š. rasmī semi- official, officious (dipl.); الظل شبه š. aẓ-ẓill penumbra; قارة شبه subcontinent; المعين شبه š. al-mu‘ayyan rhomboid (geom.); اشباھه ašbāhuhū the likes of him, his kind; وشبھھم and the likes of them, and their sort (of people); تامة عزلة شبه في (‘uzlatin tāmma) all but completely isolated, as good as completely isolated
شبه šabah pl. اشباه ašbāh resemblance, similarity, likeness; image, picture; analogue; similar, (a)like; brass
شبھة subha pl. شبھات šubhāt, šubahāt, šubuhāt obscurity, vagueness, uncertainty; doubt; suspicion; specious argument, sophism; judicial error (Isl. Law) │ ذوو الشبھات dawū š-šubuhāt or الشبھات اصحاب dubious persons, people of ill repute; تحت الشبھة suspicious, suspect
شبھان šabahān brass
شبيه šabīh pl. شباه šibāh similar (ب to), like, resembling (ب s.o., s.th.) │ شبيه بالمنحرف (munḥarif) trapezoid (geom.); شبيه بالرسمي (rasmī) semi-official, officious (dipl.); بالمعين شبيه (mu‘ayyan) rhomboid (geom.)
اشبه ašbah  more similar, more resembling, more like │ ب اشبه ھو he
resembles … more than anything else, he is just like …
مشابه mašābih  similarities, related traits
تشبيه tašbīh comparison; allegory, simile, parable; ascription of human characteristics to God, anthropomorphization (of God, theol.)
مشابھة mušābaha pl. -āt resemblance, similarity, likeness
تشبه tašabbuh imitation (ب of)
تشابه tašābuh resemblance, similarity, likeness; vagueness, haziness, indistinctness, obscurity
اشتباه ištibāh resemblance, similarity, likeness; dubiousness, doubtfulness, obscurity, inscrutability; doubt, misgiving, suspicion
مشبوه mašbūh suspicious, suspect; dubious, doubtful; notorious; a suspect
مشابه mušābih similar
متشابھات mutašābihāt obscure, not clearly intelligible passages in the Koran
فيه مشتبه (muštabah) or امره في مشتبه (amrihī) suspicious, suspect; a suspect; ب فيه مشتبه suspected of s.th. │ في مشتبه صنعه (ṣan‘ihī) of doubtful make
شبا šaban tip, point │ شباه من فل (falla) to weaken s.o.
شباة šabāh pl. شبوات šabawāt tip, point; sting, prick
شت šatta i (šatt, شتات šatāt, شتيت šatīt) to be scattered, be dispersed, be dissolved;
-- šatta i to scatter, disperse, break up (ھم a crowd, etc., ھ s.th.) │ شملھم شت (šamlahum) to disperse or break up the gathering of people, dissolve their unity II to disperse, scatter, break up (ھم a crowd, etc., ھ s.th.) │ شملھم شتت (šamlahum) = شت شملھم IV = II V to be scattered, be dispersed, be dissolved, scatter, disperse, breakup
شت šatt pl. اشتات aštāt dispersed, separate(d), scattered, dissolved; pl. اشتات manifold, variegated, diverse; scattered fragments, single pieces, sections (من of)
شتات šatāt dispersed, separate(d), scattered, dissolved
 شتيت šatīt pl. or شتى šattā dispersed, separate(d), scattered, dissolved; pl. شتى diverse, sundry, various, different, manifold, miscellaneous, all kinds of │ بينھما شتى or what a difference between the two of them! how different they are!
شتان بينھما, شتان ما بينھما, شتان šattāna: شتان … between difference a what بين – و
and ...! how different they are! 454
تشتيت taštīt dispersion, scattering, dissolution; disruption, splitting, splintering
 شتر šatara i to cut off, tear off, rip off (ھ s.th.); to tear (up) (ھ s.th.)
  شتراتšitrāt citrate, salt of citric acid
شتل šatala i to plant, transplant (ھ a plant)
šatā’il  شتائل šutūl, شتول pl. šatla شتلة
seedling, set, transplant
مشتل maštal pl. مشاتل mašātil  (plant) nursery, arboretum
شتم šatama i u (šatm) and III to abuse, revile, vilify, scold (ه s.o.) VI to vilify one another, abuse one another, heap curses upon one another
شتم šatm abuse, vilification
شتام šattām one who indulges in frequent abuse or vilification; impudent, insolent, impertinent, abusive
شتيم šatīm abused, reviled, vilified, insulted
شتيمة šatīma pl. شتائم šatā’im  abuse, vilification, vituperation, insult
مشاتمة mušātama vilification, vituperation
شتو) شتا) šatā u (šatw) to pass the winter, to winter (ب at a place); to hibernate II = I; to rain V to pass the winter, to winter, hibernate (ب at a place)
šutīy شتى aštiya, اشتية pl. šitā’ شتاء
winter; rains, rainy season
شتوي šatwī, šatawī wintery, hibernal, winter (adj.)
مشتى maštan pl. مشات mašātin winter residence, winter quarters; winter resort
شات šātin wintery, hibernal
مشتى mušattan winter residence, winter quarters; winter resort
شتى šattā pl. of شتيت šatīt (see شت)
شج šajja i (šajj) to break, split, cleave, fracture, bash in (ھ s.th., esp. the skull)
شجة šajja pl. شجاج šijāj head wound which lays open the skull; skull fracture
شجب šajaba u (šajb) and II to doom to destruction, to min, destroy (ه s.o.); to condemn morally, criticize sharply (ھ s.th.) IV to afflict, grieve (ه s.o.)
شجب šajb destruction, routing, crushing
شجب šajab sorrow, grief, worry; distress, affliction
شجاب šijāb pl. شجب šujub clothes hook (attached to the wall)
مشجب mišjab pl. مشاجب mašājib  clothes hook, clothes rack
شجر šajara u (šajr) to happen, occur; to break out, develop (unrest) III to quarrel, argue, dispute (مع or ه with s.o.) VI to quarrel, fight, dispute (with one another); to quarrel, argue, fight (مع with) VIII do.
الشجرية الحروف al-ḥurūf aš-šajrīya the sounds j, š, ḍ (phon.)
شجر šajar (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. اشجار ašjār
trees; shrubs, bushes
شجرة šajara pl. -āt tree; shrub, bush │ النسب شجر š. an-nasab genealogical tree
شجر šajir woody, wooded, abounding in trees
شجير šajīr pl. شجراء šujarā’  bad companion, bad company
شجيرة šujaira pl. -āt shrub, bush
شجار šijār (wooden) bar, bolt
اشجر ašjar , f. شجراء šajrā’  woody, wooded, abounding in trees
تشجير tašjīr afforestation
شجار šijār fight, quarrel; dispute, argument; see also above 455
مشاجرة mušājara fight, quarrel; dispute, argument
مشجر mušajjar figured with designs of plants, branched (cloth)
 مشجر musjir abounding in trees, wooded
 شجران šajarān shagreen (leather)
شجع šaju‘a u (شجاعة šajā‘a) to be courageous, brave, valiant, hold II to encourage, embolden, hearten (ه على s.o. to); to favor, support, hack, promote, further (ه ھ s.o., s.th.) V to take heart, pluck up courage; to show o.s. courageous; to be encouraged
شجاع šujā‘, šijā‘ pl. شجعة šaja‘a, شجعان šuj‘ān courageous, brave, valiant, bold; hero; الشجاع Hydra (astron.)
شجيع šajī‘ pl. m. شجعاء šuja‘ā’ , شجعان šuj‘ān, pl. f. شجائع šajā’i‘ , شجاع šijā‘ courageous, brave, valiant, bold, audacious
شجاعة sajā‘a courage, bravery, valor, valiance, boldness, audacity
اشجع ašja‘ , f. شجعاء šaj‘ā’  courageous, brave, valiant, bold, audacious
اشجع ašja‘, išjā‘ pl. اشاجع ašāji‘ 
(proximal or lint) phalanx of the finger
تشجيع tašjī‘ encouragement, heartening, animation (على to); favoring, furtherance, promotion, advancement
مشجع mušajji‘ encourager; promoter, supporter, advocate, proponent
شجن šajina a to be sad, grieved, distressed, worried; to coo (pigeon); -- šajana u (šajn, شجون šujūn) to sadden, grieve, distress, worry (ه s.o.) II and IV = šajana
شجن šajan pl. شجون šujūn, اشجان ašjān worry, anxiety, apprehension; sorrow, grief, distress, sadness; (pl. šujun) twig, branch │شجون الحديث conversation drifts from one topic to another
(شجو and شجا (شجى šajā u (شجو šajw) to worry, trouble, grieve, sadden, distress, fill with anxiety (ه s.o.); -- شجى šajiya a (شجا šajan) to be or become worried, troubled, grieved, sad, distressed, anxious, apprehensive II to move, touch, grip (ه s.o.) IV to grieve, worry, trouble, sadden, fill with anxiety (ه s.o.)
شج šajin, f. شجية šajiya worried, troubled, grieved, sad, anxious, apprehensive
شجو šajw grief, worry, distress, anxiety, apprehension, sadness; fear; affectedness, emotion; wailing, plaintive, moving strain (of a tune, of a song, of an instrument)
شجوى šajawī worried, troubled, grieved, distressed, sad
شجا and شجى šajān foreign body in the throat which inhibits breathing; شجا affectedness, emotion, being moved, a touching, pathetic mood; also = شجو šajw
شجى šajīy worried, troubled, grieved, distressed, sad; anxious, apprehensive, fearful; gripping, heart-rending, touching, moving (vocal part, music)
مشج mušajjin moving, touching, gripping, pathetic
شح šaḥḥa (1  pers. perf. šaḥaḥtu) u i (šuḥḥ) to be or become stingy, tight-fisted, avaricious, miserly, niggardly; to stint, economize (على or ب with or in s.th., على toward s.o.); to be covetous, greedy (على or ب for); to become short, run out, decrease, dwindle III to stint, be niggardly, be sparing; to withhold (ب from
s.o. على s.th.)
شح šuḥḥ stinginess, avarice, niggardliness; greed, covetousness; scarcity, paucity, sparsity; ebb
شحيح šaḥīḥ pl. شحاح šiḥāḥ, اشحة ašiḥḥa, اشحاء ašiḥḥā’ , pl. f. شحائح šaḥā’iḥ  stingy, tight-fisted, niggardly, miserly, avaricious (على or ب with, على toward): 456 short, scarce, meager, sparse; greedy, covetous ( على or) │ الشحائح األيام (ayyām) the rainless days, the dry season
مشاحة mušāḥḥa: ذلك في مشاحة ال. (mušāḥḥata) that is incontestable; مشاحة ال ان it is incontestable that ...,
indisputably ...; مشاحة وال incontestably, indisputably
شحب šaḥaba u a (شحوب šuḥūb), šaḥūba u (شحوبة šuḥūba) and pass. šuḥiba to be or become pale, wan, sallow, emaciated, lean, haggard; to look ill, sickly
شحوب šuḥūb paleness, pallor, wanness, sallowness, emaciation
شاحب šāḥib pl. شواحب šawāḥib  pale, wan, sallow; emaciated, lean, haggard;
 dim, pale (e.g., light); dull, faded (color); wan (smile)
□شحت šaḥata (= شحذ) to beg, ask for alms
□شحات šaḥḥāt pl. ة beggar │ □ شحات العين š. al-‘ain sty (med.)
شحذ šaḥada a (šaḥd) to whet, sharpen, practice, train, strengthen (ھ s.th., also, e.g., the intellect, one’s forces); to hone, strop (ھ a knife); to beg, ask for alms (ه s.o.)
شحاذ šaḥḥād (importunate) beggar │ العين شحاذ š. al-‘ain sty (med.)
beggary شحاذة
مشحذ mišḥad, مشحذة mišḥada whetstone, hone
شحر II to soot, besmut, blacken with soot (ھ s.th.)
شحار šuḥḥār soot
مشحر mašḥar charcoal kiln, pile
مشحري mašḥarī charcoal burner
شحرور šuḥrūr pl. شحارير šaḥārīr  thrush, blackbird (zool.)
مشحر mušaḥḥar sooty
شحط šaḥṯa a (šaḥṯ) to be far away, distant, remote; to strike (ھ a match); to strand, be stranded, run aground (ship); to ground on a sandbank II to strand, be stranded, run aground (ship); to ground on a sandbank; to strand (ھ a ship)
شحطة šaḥṭa pl. -āt stripe, braid (on a uniform)
شحاطة šaḥḥāṭa pl. -āt (syr.) match, lucifer
شحيطة šuḥḥaiṭa (syr.) match, lucifer
شاحط šāḥiṭ far (away), distant, remote, outlying, out-of-the-way; stranded
شحم šaḥuma u (شحامة šaḥāma) to be or become fat II to grease, lubricate (ھ s.th.)
شحم šaḥm pl. شحوم šuḥum, شحومات šuḥūmāt fat, suet, grease; axle grease, lubricant; tallow, sebum; lard; pulp (of fruit)
شحمة šaḥma (n. un.) a piece of fat, etc. (see األذن شحمة │ (شحم š. al-udun earlobe;
š. شحمة العين truffle; al-arḍ s. شحمة األرض eyeball al-‘ain
شحمي šaḥmī fatty, sebaceous, stearic شحم šaḥim pulpy, mushy, pappy (fruit) شحيم šaḥīm fat, fatty
mašāḥim  مشاحم pl. mišḥama مشحمة O
grease box (of a wheel)
تشحيم tašḥīm lubrication, greasing, oiling (of a machine) │ التشحيم زيوت lubricating oils, lubricants
تشحم tašaḥḥum fatness, obesity مشحم mušaḥḥam fat, fatty, greasy مشحم mušḥim pulpy, mushy, pappy
(fruit)
شحن šaḥana a (šaḥn) to fill up (ب ھ s.th. with); to load, freight (ب ھ so ship with); to ship, freight, consign (ھ goods); to 457 load, charge (ھ ب s.th. with, el.); to drive away, chase away, repel (ه s.o.) III to hate (ه s.o.); to quarrel, argue, fight (ه with s.o.) IV to fill up (ھ ب s.th. with); to load, freight (ھ ب s.th. with) VI to hate one another; to quarrel, have a feud
شحن šaḥn loading, freighting; shipment, freightage; cargo, lading, load, freight │ الشحن بوليسة būlīsat aš-š. sill of lading; سيارة شحن sayyārat š. truck, lorry
شحنة šaḥna pl. šaḥanāt cargo, lading, load, freight; charge (el.)
شحنة šiḥna police, police force
شحناء šaḥnā’  grudge, rancor, hatred, enmity
مشاحنة mušāḥana pl. -āt grudge, rancor, hatred, enmity; quarrel, feud, controversy
شاحن šāḥin loaded, laden, freighted (esp. ship) │ O المركم شاحن š. al-markam battery charger
شاحنة šāḥina pl. -āt truck, lorry; baggage car
مشحون mašḥūn loaded, laden, freighted (esp. ship); charged (el.); pl. مشحونات cargo, lading, load, freight
شحور šaḥwara to soot, besmut, blacken with soot (ھ s.th.)
شحور šaḥwar blackbird (zool.)
 شحور šaḥwār soot, smut
شخ šakka u (šakk) to urinate, piss, make water
شخ šakk urine, piss
شخاخ šakāk urine, piss
مشخخة miškaka public lavatory
شخب šakaba u a (šakb) to flow, stream, run, pour forth, gush forth
شخبط šakbaṭa to scribble, scrawl (in writing)
شختور šaktūr, شختورة pl. شخاتير šakātīr large, flat-bottomed (wooden) barge; punt
شخر šakara i (شخير šakīr) to snore; to snort; to neigh, whinny; to bray (donkey)
شخشخ šakšaka to rattle, clatter, clank
 šakāšik شخاشخ pl. šukšēka (eg.) شخشخية
rattle (toy); toy, plaything; skylight

شخص šakaṣa a (شخوص šukūṣ) to rise, tower up; to become high, lofty; to rise, ascend (star); to appear (ل to s.c.); to stare, gaze ( الى at, of the eye), be fixed (الى on, of the glance); to be glazed (eyes of a dying person); to start out, leave, depart (الى to see s.o., for a place), travel, journey (الى to s.o., to a place); to pass (الى من from one state or condition into another) │ شخص بصره (baṣarahū) or ببصره شخص to fix  one’s eyes, one’s glance (الى on), look fixedly (الى at s.o.), stare, gaze (الى at) II to represent as a person or individual, personify (ھ s.th.); to specify (ھ s.th.), identify (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to act, play (ھ a part, of the actor); to perform (actor) │ مرضا شخص (maraḍan) to diagnose a disease IV to send off, send out, dispatch ( ه s.o.) V to appear, be revealed, show o.s. ( ل to s.o.)
شخص šakṣ pl. اشخاص aškāṣ, شخوص šukūṣ individual, person; figure; character (of a play); someone, somebody
one’s of private, personal, šakṣī شخصي قانون │ personally šakṣīyan شخصيا own; statute personal )نظام( األحوال الشخصية
شخصية šakšīya pl. -āt individuality, personality (also = personage); distinctive way of life, peculiarity, distinctive character, personal stamp; identity │ اعتبارية شخصية (i‘tibārīya) legal person (jur.); الشخصية تحقيق identification of a
aš-š. t. šahādat شھادة تحقيق الشخصية person; aš- t. qalam قلم تحقيق الشخصية card; identity 458 identification of bureau š.
شخصاتي šakṣātī (comic) actor, comedian
تشخيص taškīṣ personification; exact designation, specification; identification; diagnosis; acting, performance (on stage), play(ing) (of an actor)
طبيب تشخيصي │ diagnostic تشخيصي
diagnostician
شاخص šākiṣ fixed, glazed (glance); pole, stake (eg.)
مشخص mušakkiṣ actor, player; representative
مشخصة mušakkaṣa pl. -āt actress, player; personality
مشخصات mušakkiṣāt qualities or factors lending s.th. its distinctive character, peculiarities, characteristics
شخط šakaṭa (eg.) to shout, bark, bellow (في at s.o.)
شخلل šaklala (eg.) to jingle, tinkle; to clatter, rattle (ب with); to coquet, flirt
شخليلة šaklīla (eg.) jingle, jangle, tinkling
شد šadda i (شدة šidda) to be or become firm, fast, solid, hard, strong, vigorous, rosust, vehement, violent, intense; -- šadda u i (šadd) to make firm, hard, strong, solidify, harden, srace (ھ s.th.), strengthen, fortify (ه ,ھ s.o., s.th.); to tighten, pull taut, draw tight (ھ s.th., e.g., the sow); to fasten, tie, sind (الى or ھ على s.th. on, to), lash (ھ على s.th. on); to saddle (على an animal); to put emphasis (كلمة على ‘alā kalimatin on word), emphasize, stress (كلمة على a word); to pull, drag (من ه s.o. sy the coat); to charge, launch an attack (على against, on), assault, attack (على s.o., s.th.); to press (على s.th. or upon s.th.), exert pressure (على on); to insist (في on s.th.) │ ما شد šadda-mā and ما لشد (la-šadda) (with foll. vers) how much ...! very often ...; very much, exceedingly, vehemently, violently; اذ سرورنا كان ما لشد tremendous was our joy when …; ازره شد (azrahū) or ازره من شد to help, support, encourage, sack up s.o.; ازره شد (azruhū) to be
 energetic, vigorous, courageous; الزمام شد to tighten the reins, master the situation; عزائمه من شد to strengthen s.o.’s determination; شدعضده (‘aḍudahū) to strengthen, support, solster, assist s.o.; شد راحلته على (be saddled his female riding camel =) he started out on the journey; شد راحلته على to start out, depart, leave (الى for); وثاقه شد (watāqahū) to shackle, fetter s.o.; على يده شد (yadahū) to adhere, cling to s.th.; يديه على شد (yadaihi) to clasp s.o.’s hands II to strengthen, intensify (ھ s.th.), make (ھ s.th.) strong, hard, harsh, severe; (gram.) to intensify, dousle, geminate (ھ a consonant); to exert pressure ( علىon), press (على upon); to be hard, strict, stern ( في على toward s.o. in); to impress (ب على upon s.o. s.th.) │ طلبه في شدد (ṭalasihī) to demand s.th. emphatically or inexorasly; عزيمته من شدد (šuddida) he was strengthened in his determination III to argue, have an argument, an exchange of words (ه with s.o.) V to be hard, harsh, strict, severe, stern (على toward); to be or become violent, vehement, intense, strong; to show o.s. stem, harsh, hard, inexorasle, be relentless, remain unmoved, unrelenting VI to argue with one another VIII to be or become hard, harsh, rigorous, intense, forceful, severe, strong, vehement, violent, passionate; to become harder, harsher, more rigorous, more intense, more forceful, severer, stronger, more vehement, more violent, more passionate; to intensify, increase, grow; to become aggravated, more critical; to become tormenting, excruciating, distressing, unbearable 459 (على for s.o.), take a turn for the worse (disease, على with s.o.); to be advanced (time of the day); to run, race, dash │ ساعده اشتد (sā‘iduhū) to become strong, vigorous
شد šadd: الحبل شد š. al-ḥabl tug of war
شدة šadda (n. vic.) strengthening, intensification; stress, emphasis; pulling, dragging, tugging; tightness, tautness; stress, strain; doubling sign over a consonant (gram.) │ اللعب ورق شدة š. waraq al-la‘b deck of cards
شدة šidda strength, forcefulness, power, vehemence, violence, intensity, severity, force, high degree, (pl. شدائد šadā’id )
misfortune, calamity, misery, adversity, distress, hardship, affliction, discomfort
شداد šadād pl. اشدة ašidda riding saddle (of a camel)
شديد šadīd pl. اشداء ašiddā’ , شداد šidād strong, powerful, forceful, vigorous, stem, severe, rigorous, hard, harsh, violent, vehement, intense; bad, evil, ominous, calamitous, difficult (على for s.o.); with foll. subst. frequently corresponding to Engl. “very”, e.g., االعتناء شديد very attentive, very careful │ شديدة ارض (arḍ) solid or firm ground; البأس شديد š. al-ba’s courageous, stouthearted, bold, audacious, brave, valiant; الشكيمة شديد stubborn, obstinate, unbending, unyielding, relentless; اللھجة شديد š. al-lahja strongly worded, vehement in language, sharp in tone; الوطأة شديد š. al-waṭ’a cruel
شديدة šadīda pl. شدائد  šadā’id  misfortune, calamity, misery, adversity, distress, hardship, affliction, discomfort
اشد ašadd  stronger, more intense, severer, harder, worse │ used with foll. indeterminate abstract substantives as paraphrase of simple elatives, e.g., سوادا اشد (sawādan) blacker, غضبا اشد (gaḍaban) more wrathful, angrier; يكون ما اشد extremely, exceedingly, very much, e.g., العلم الى تعطشا يكون ما اشد روحھم (rūḥuhum, ta‘attušan, ‘ilm) they are extremely eager for knowledge
اشد ašudd physical maturity, virility │ اشده بلغ to attain full maturity, come of legal age; to reach its climax
مشد mišadd pl. -āt corset, stays
تشديد tašdīd intensification, strengthening; (gram.) intensified pronunciation, germination, doubling (of a consonant); doubling sign over a consonant; pressure (على on)
مشادة mušādda exchange of words, squabble, argument, quarrel, fight, controversy, conflict
اشتداد ištidād aggravation, intensification, increase; deterioration
مشدود mašdūd tense, tight, taut
مشدد mušaddid: مشددة ظروف aggravating circumstances
 مشدد mušaddad doubled (letter; gram.); emphatic, intense; severe, stern
متشدد mutašaddid pl. -ūn stem zealot, bigot, proponent of a stern viewpoint
شدح šadaka a (šadk) to break, shatter, smash, crush (ھ s.th.) II do.
شادر šādir pl. شوادر šawādir  tent; storehouse, warehouse, magazine
شادوف šādūf pl. شوادف šawādīr (eg.) shadoof, counterpoised sweep for raising irrigation water
شدق V to announce (ب s.th.) in a boastful, bragging, loud-mouthed manner, to vaunt (ب s.th.); to chatter, prattle │ بالكالم تشدق (kalām) to enunciate overcarefully, speak affectedly; to be agape
شدق šidq pl. اشداق ašdāq corner of the mouth; jawbone │ شدقيه (ملء) بملء ضحك ٠٦٤ ḍaḥika bi-mil’i (mil’a) šidqaihi to grin from ear to ear
اشدق ašdaq , f. شدقاء šadqā’  having a large mouth, largemouthed
متشدق mutaš8addiq pl. -ūn braggart, boaster, bigmouth
شدن šadana u to be weaned, be on its own feet (young animal)
شادن šādin pl. شوادن šawādin  gazelle fawn
شده šadaha a to confuse, perplex, baffle (ه s.o.)
مشدوه mašdūh perplexed, appalled, baffled
شدو) شدا) šadā u (šadw) to sing; to chant (ھ s.th.); to acquire or have education, become or be educated (في in a field) │ شدا العربية من شيئا to know a little Arabic, have a smattering of Arabic
شدو šadw song, chant
شاد šādin pl. شادون šādūn educated, trained (e.g., اللغة في linguistically) │ليلة شادية laila šādiya soirée of vocal music
شادية šādiya songstress, singer
شدياق šidyāq pl. شدايقة šadāyiqa sub deacon (Chr.)
شذ šadda i u (šadd, شذوذ šudūd) to segregate, separate, isolate o.s. (عن from), be
separated, isolated (عن from), be outside s.th. (عن), elude (عن s.th.); to be alone; to be irregular, deviate, stand out (على or عن from), be an exception (على or عن to); to be wanting, lacking; to decrease, dwindle
شذ šadd irregularity, deviation, anomaly, exception (عن to)
شذوذ irregularity, deviation, anomaly, exception (عن to); curiosity, eccentricity, eccentric character
شاذ šādd pl. شذاذ šudād, شواذ šawādd  isolated, separate(d), detached, alone; irregular, abnormal, anomalous, unusual, extraordinary, exceptional, singular, curious, queer, odd, peculiar, strange, eccentric; noncanonical (version); pl. شواذ exceptions │ األخالق شاذ of deviant (= inferior) character; الطبع شاذ š. aṭ-ṯab‘, شاذ األطوار شاذ الطبع، eccentric, extravagant, crazy; اآلفاق شذاذ the foreigners, the strangers
شواذات šawāddāt peculiarities, idiosyncrasies
شذب šadaba i u (šadb) to out off, sever (ھ s.th.); to trim, clip, prune, lop (ھ hedges, trees); to adept, doctor, modify (ھ s.th.) II do.
شذر V to be scattered, be dispersed; to scatter, disperse
شذرة šadra pl. šadarāt, شذور šudūr
particle, bit, tiny piece; fragment, section
مذر شذر تفرقوا tafarraqū šadara madara, šidara midara they scattered in all directions
شذو šadw fragrance of musk
شذا šadan flagrance, scent, aroma
شذى šadīy fragrant, aromatic
شر šarra (1  pers. perf. šarirtu) a, (1  pers. perf. šarurtu) u (šarr, شرة širra) to be bad, evil, wicked, vicious, malicious, malignant
شر šarr pl. شرور šurūr evil, ill, mischief; calamity, disaster; iniquity, injustice; harm, damage, injury; wickedness, viciousness, malice; vice, sin;
-- (pl. اشرار ašrār) bad, evil, wicked, vicious, malicious; evildoer, culprit; -- šarr (as elative) worse, more evil │ ھزمھم
 ھزيمة شر(šarra hazīmatin) he brought utter defeat upon them 461
شراني šarrānī evil, vicious, malicious
شرة širra evil, ill, mischief; calamity, disaster; iniquity, injustice; harm, damage, injury; wickedness, viciousness, malice; vice, sin; vivacity enthusiasm, fire of youth
شرير šarīr pl. اشراء aširrā’  bad, evil, wicked, vicious, malicious
شرير širrīr very bad, very evil, very wicked, very vicious, very malicious; scoundrel; الشرير the Evil One (= Satan)
شرر šarar (coll.; n. un. ة) sparks
شررى šararī spark (used attributively)
شرار šarār (coll.; n. un. ة) sparks
شرارة šarāra pl. -āt spark │ الشرارة شمعة šam‘at aš-š. spark plug; الشرارة مفتاح miftāḥ aš-š. ignition key (automobile)
شراري šarārī spark (used attributively)
شرار šarrār sparkling, scintillating, emitting sparks
اشرأب išra’abba to stretch one’s neck in order to see s.th. (ل or الى), crane one’s neck for (ل or الى); to carry one’s head high (out of vanity); to leer (الى at)
شراب šurrāb pl. -āt stocking, sock
شراس širās glue, paste
  شرب šariba a (šurb, مشرب mašrab) to drink ( ھ s.th.); to sip (ھ s.th.) │ حبه في شرب (ḥubbihī) to drink s.o.’s health, toast s.o.; الدخان شرب (dukāna) to smoke; نخبه شرب (nakbahū) to drink s.o.’s health, toast s.o. II to give (ھ ه s.o. s.th.) to drink, make or let drink (ھ ه s.o. s.th.); to drench, soak, saturate, impregnate (ھ ب s.th. with); to inculcate, imbue (ھ ه s.o. with s.th.) III to drink in s.o.’s (ه) company, have a drink (ه with s.o.) IV to give (ھ ه s.o. s.th.) to drink, make or let drink (ھ ه s.o. s.th.); to drench, soak, saturate, impregnate (ب or ھ ھ s.th. with); to inculcate, imbue (ه ھ s.o. with); pass. ušriba to be or become full (ھ of s.th.), be filled, imbued, infused (ھ with s.th.), be dominated, permeated (ھ by s.th.) │ يشرب لم ما اشربه (yašrab) to attribute s.th. wrongly to s.o. V to soak up,
absorb, imbibe (ھ s.th.); to be permeated, imbued, infused (ب ھ، with s.th.) ; to be full
(ب of), be filled, replete (ب with)
شرب šurb drinking, drink; absorption
شربة šarba drink; sip, draught, swallow; dose, potion (of a medicine); laxative, purgative, aperient
شربة šurba drink; sip, draught, swallow; dose, potion (of a medicine)
شراب šarāb pl. اشربة ašriba beverage, drink; wine; fruit juice, fruit syrup, sherbet
│ التفاح شراب š. at-tuffāḥ apple juice; cider;
البرتقال شراب š. al-burtuqāl orangeade شراب šarrāb drunkard, heavy drinker شريب šarīb drinkable, potable
شراريب pl. šurraba šarrāba, شرابة
šarārīb  tassel, tuft, bob │ الراعي شرابة š.
ar-rā‘ī (European) holly (Ilex aquifolium; bot.)
شريب širrīb drunkard, heavy drinker
مشرب mašrab drink (as opposed to food); (pl. مشارب mašārib ) drinking place, water hole, drinking trough, drinking fountain; restaurant, bar; inclination, taste; movement, school (e.g., in philosophy)
مشربة mašraba pl. مشارب mašārib  drinking place, water hole, drinking trough, drinking fountain
مشربية mašrabīya, mušrabīya and مشربة mašraba moucharaby, projecting oriel window with a wooden latticework enclosure; wooden oriel; attic room; 462 mašrabīya a kind of drinking vessel; vase, pot for flowers
تشرب tašarrub absorption, soaking up, imbibing
شارب šārib pl. -ūn, شرب šarb, شروب šurūb drinking; drinker; (pl. شوارب šawārib ) mustache, frequently dual: شاربان
مشروب mašrūb pl. -āt drink, beverage │ روحية مشروبات (rūḥīya) alcoholic beverage, liquors
  شربة šorba soup
 شوربة šorba (eg.), شوربا šōraba (syr.) soup
  شراب šurrāb pl. -āt stocking, sock
شربك šarbaka to (en)tangle, snarl (ھ s.th.), to complicate (ھ s.th.)
شربين šarbīn a variety of larch (bot.)
  شرج šaraj pl. اشراج ašrāj loop, ring, eyelet; buttonhole; anus
شرجي šarajī anal
  شيرج look up alphabetically
شرح šaraḥa a (šarḥ) to cut in slices, slice, cut up (ھ s.th.); to cut open, rip open (ھ s.th.); to bare, expose, make clearly visible or discernible (ھ s.th.), to expound (ھ s.th.); to explain, elucidate, illustrate, make plain, set forth, describe, depict (ھ s.th.); to comment (ھ on), interpret (ھ s.th.), to open, lay open (صدره s.o. ṣadrahū s.o.’s heart, ل to or for the acceptance of) │ شرح خاطره (kāṭirahū) to gladden, delight s.o. II to cut in slices, slice, cut up (ھ s.th.); to dissect, dismember, anatomize (ھ a corpse) VII to be opened (heart); to be relaxed; to be glad, happy │ صدره انشرح (ṣadruhū) and خاطره انشرح (kāṭiruhū) to be or become glad, happy or delighted, rejoice
شرح šarḥ expounding, presentation, explanation, illustration, elucidation, exposition, setting forth; commentation; (pl. (شروح šurūḥ) commentary
شرحي šarḥī explanatory, explicatory, illustrative
شرحة šarḥa long, thin slice, rasher
شريحة šarīḥa pl. شرائح šarā’iḥ long, thin slice (e.g., of fruit, etc.), rasher; girth, cinch; O (microscope) slide
O مشرحة mašraḥa operating room; operating table; autopsy room
تشريح tašrīḥ dissection; anatomy; autopsy, post-mortem examination │ علم التشريح ‘ilm at-t. anatomy, O المقابلة تشريح t. al.muqābala comparative anatomy
تشريحي tašrīhī dissecting, anatomizing, dissective, dissectional, anatomic(al)
انشراح inširāḥ relaxedness, relaxation, joy, delight, glee, gaiety
شارح šāriḥ pl. شراح šurrāḥ explainer, expounder, interpreter, commentator, expositor
مشرح mušarriḥ anatomist
  شرخ šaraka u (شرخ šurūk) to become a youth. grow from childhood to maturity
شرخ šark prime of youth, spring of life
  شرح šaraka a (eg.) to crack, splinter, become cracked
شرخ šark pl. شروخ šurūk (eg.) crack, break, fissure, fracture
شرد šarada u (شراد šarrād, شرود šurūd) to bolt (horse), to run away, flee, take to flight, take to one’s heels, break loose, escape; to roam, rove, wander, stray, go astray; to be distracted (thoughts) │ ذھنه شرد (dihnahū) to be absent-minded الفكر به شرد (fikru) he became lost in thought II to frighten away, chase away, drive away (ه s.o.); to scare (ه s.o.), frighten (ه s.o.) into a panic IV to chase away, drive 463 away (ه s.o.) V to roam, tramp about, lead a vagabond life
شرود šarūd pl. شرد šurūd running away; straying; astray, deviant, aberrant, strange, peculiar
شرود šurūd roaming, straying, wandering │ الفكر شرود š. al-fikr absent- mindedness, distractedness
شريد šarīd fugitive, expatriated, displaced, expelled; loafer, tramp, vagrant, vagabond
تشريد tašrīd expulsion, banishment, eviction; vagrancy, vagabondage │ حياة التشريد ḥayāt at-t. the unsettled life, life of a vagabond
تشرد tašarrud vagrancy, vagabondage
شارد šārid pl. شرد šurud, šurrad, شوارد šawārid  fugitive, straying, astray; intimidated, frightened, helpless at a loss; a fugitive, runaway, deserter; defector; vagrant, tramp, vagabond │ الفكر شارد š. al-fikr absent-minded, distracted; شوارد اللغة š. al-luga irregularities of the language, linguistic anomalies; النظر شارد النظرات)) š. an-naẓar (an-naẓarāt) with a blank stare; gazing into the void
šawarid  شوارد pl. šārida شاردة
peculiarity, anomaly, exception │ تفوته ال
 واردة وال شاردة (tafūtuhū) nothing escapes him, he doesn’t miss a thing
مشرد mušarrad fugitive, refugee, displaced person; neglected, unkempt │ البال مشرد confused, disconcerted
متشرد mutašarrid pl. -ūn homeless person, tramp, vagrant, vagabond; adventurer
شردق II tašardaqa to swallow the wrong way; to choke (to death)
شرذم II tašardama to be jagged, indented
شرذمة širdima pl. شراذم šarādim  , شراذيم šarādīm  small group, gang, party, troop; little band
  شرس šarisa a (šaras, شراسة šarāsa) to be vicious, malicious, mischievous, ill- tempered, unsociable, quarrelsome, petulant, peevish VI to be cross, quarrel ( مع with)
شراسة = šaras شرس
شرس šaris vicious, malicious, mischievous, ill-tempered, unsociable, quarrelsome, petulant, peevish; wild, ferocious, fierce
šaris شرس = šarīs شريس
شراسة šarāsa wickedness, malice, viciousness, meanness, baseness, villainy; ill-temperedness, unsociableness, querulousness, petulance, peevishness
سراس، سيراس see paste, glue, širās شراس   cartilage rib šarāsīf  شراسيف pl. šursūf شرسوف
شراسيفي šarāsīfī epigastric, pertaining to the anterior walls of the abdomen
شرش II to take root
│ root šurūš شروش pl. شرش širš شرش whey al-laban š. شرش اللبن
شرشور šuršur pl. شراشير šarāšīr chaffinch (zool.)
شرشير šaršīr (eg.) wild duck (zool.)
شراشير šarāšīr  soul, self, nature (of a person)
شرشف šaršaf pl. شراشف šarāšif bedsheet
شرط šaraṭa i u (šarṭ) to tear (ھ s.th.); to make incicions (ھ in), scratch, scarify (ھ s.th.); to slit open, rip open (ھ s.th.); to impose
as a condition, as an obligation (على ھ on
s.o. s.th.), make conditional (على ھ for s.o. s.th.); to stipulate (ھ s.th.) II to tear to shreds (ھ s.th.); to scratch, scarify (ھ s.th.); to make incisions (ھ in) III to fix mutual conditions.; to make a contract, conclude an agreement; to bet, wager (ه with s.o.) V to impose severe oonditiono or terms │ عمله في تشرط (‘amalihī) to be meticulous in one’s 464 work, do one’s work painstakingly VIII to impose as a condition, as an obligation (ھ على on s.o. s.th.); to make conditional (ھ على for s.o. s.th.); to stipulate (ھ s.th.); pass, ušturiṭa to be prerequisite, preconditional (ل for)
شرط šarṭ pl. شروط šurūṭ incision (in the skin); long cut, rip, clash, slit; condition, precondition; provision, proviso, clause; stipulation (of a contract) │ ان شرطا (šarṯan), بشرط شرط، على on the condition that ..., provided that ...; شرط (بدون) دون من unconditional; قيد او شرط بال (au qaidin) with no strings attached; unconditional (obedience, surrender, etc.); الخيار شرط proviso of the right of withdrawal (from a contract, a commercial transaction, an obligation, and the like, Isl. Law)
شرط šaraṭ pl. اشراط ašrāṭ sign, portent
│ الساعة اشراط the portents of the Day of Judgment
جملة شرطية │ conditional šarṭī شرطي
(jumla) conditional clause (gram.)
شرطية šarṭīya contract, agreement
شرطة šarṭa pl. شرط šuraṭ stroke, line; hyphen; dash
دار │ policemen police, šurṭa شرطة police تقرير الشرطة station; police الشرطة report
شرطي šurṭī, šuraṭī pl. -ūn policeman, officer
شريط pl. شرائط šarā’iṭ, اشرطة ašriṭa band, ribbon, tape; cord, string; leash, line; thong, strap; braid, galloon, chevron, stripe; ribbon (of an order), medal ribbon, service ribbon; (railway) track, line; film strip; film (also سينمائي شريط); (magnetic) tape │ مصغر شريط (muṣaggar) microfilm; القياس شريط tape measure; measuring tape; ناطق شريط pl. ناطقة شرائط sound film; sound
 track; magnetic tape; النار شريط fuse; دودة الشريط dūdat aš-š. tapeworm
شريطة šarīṭa condition │ شريطة على on the condition that ...
مشرط mašraṭ program
مشرط mišraṭ pl. مشارط mašāriṭ  lancet, scalpel
تشريط tašrīṭ scarification, incision
مشارطة mušāraṭa agreement, arrangement
اشتراط ištirāṭ pl. -āt condition, provision, proviso; stipulation
شرطن šarṭana to consecrate, ordain (ه s.o.,
Chr.) II to be ordained (Chr.)
شرطونية = šarṭana شرط
شرطونية šarṭūnīya ordination of a priest, and any ordination of persons by laying on of hands (Chr.); simony (Copt.-Chr.)
شرع šara‘a a (šar‘, شروع šurū‘) to go ( في into), enter (في s.th.); to begin, start, commence (في or y with; with foil. imperf.: to do s.th.); to point a weapon (ھ) at s.o. (على); to untie, unbind, unlace (ھ s.th.); to fix (ھ bayonets, على on rifles); -- šara‘a a (šar‘) to introduce, enact (o laws), prescribe, give (ل ھ to s.o. laws), make laws (ھ) for s.o. (مشروعا شرع │ (ل to devise a plan II to draw a weapon (ھ) on
s.o. (على); to legislate, make laws IV to draw or train a weapon (ھ) on s.o. ((على الى عينه اشرع │ (‘ainaihi) to cast one’s eyes on …, turn one’s glance toward ...; اشرع قلمه (qalamahū) to draw one’s pen = to prepare to write VIII to introduce, enact ( ھ laws); to prescribe, give (ھ ل to s.o. laws), make laws (ھ) for s.o. (ل)
الشرع aš-šar‘ the Revelation, the canonical law of Islam │ وفرعا شرعا šar‘an wa-far‘an with full right, with good cause, by rights; واحد شرع ھذا في ھم they are alike in this 467
شروق šurūq rise (of the sun)
شراقي šarāqī (eg.) unirrigated land not reached by the Nile floods
شراق šarrāq suctorial device; part of a suction pump
□ شراقوة šarāquwa (pl. of شرقاوي) Levantines (eg.)
place mašāriq  مشارق pl. mašriq مشرق Orient, the rise; of place east; sunrise, of مشارق │ West and East المشرقان East; the or wa-magāribuhā al-arḍ m. األرض ومغاربھا whole the (magribān) المشرقان والمغربان the over all في الغربين وفي المشرقين world; world
مشرقي mašriqī eastern, easterly, oriental; (pl. مشارقة mašāriqa) an Oriental; المشرقيات orientalia, oriental studies
تشريق tašrīq easternization; development of domestic production (esp. in local industry, with the gradual elimination of Europe), drive for (economic) independence │ التشريق ايام ayyām at-t. the old name of the three days following the day of Immolation (10  of Zu’lhijja)
during the hadj festival
اشراق išrāq radiance; radiation, eradiation, emanation; Illuminism (mysticism deriving from Neoplatonism)
االشراقيون al-išrāqīyūn the Illuminists, adherents of Illuminism
االستشراق al-istišrāq oriental studies
مشرق mašriq resplendent, radiant, shining
مستشرق mustašriq having oriental manners; (pl. -ūn) orientalist
شرقرق šaraqraq, شرقراق šarāqrāq green woodpecker
شرك šarika a (širk, شركة širka, šarika) to share (في ه with s.o s.th.), participate (ه في with
s.o. in), be or become partner, participant, associate (ه في of s.o. in) III to share (في or ه ھ with s.o., s.th.), participate (في or ه ھ with s.o. in), be or become partner, participant, associate (في or ه ھ of s.o. in); to associate o.s. (ه with s.o.), enter into partnership (ه with s.o.), form a partnership, join, combine (في or ه ھ with
s.o. in); to sympathize (ه with s.o.) │ شاركه رأيه (ra’yahū) to share s.o.’s opinion IV to make (ه s.o.) a partner, participant, associate (في in), give (ه s.o.) a share (في in), have (ه s.o.) share (في in); to tie s.th. ( ھ) closely to s.th. (ب), associate (ب ھ s.th.
 with s.th.) │ <Iبا اشركه to make s.o. the associate or partner of God (in His creation and rule); <Iبا اشرك to set up or attribute associates to God. i.e. to be a polytheist, an idolator VI to enter into partnership (مع with s.o.); to participate together (في in), share with one another (في s.th,) VIII to enter into partnership, to cooperate (مع with s.o.); to participate (مع في with s.o. in), share (في مع with s.o., s.th.), collaborate, take part (في in), contribute (في to); to subscribe (في to); to partake of the Lord’s Supper, communicate (Copt.-Chr.)
شرك širk polytheism, idolatry │ اھل الشرك ahl aš-š. the polytheists, the idolators
شرك šarak pl. شرك šuruk, اشراك ašrāk, شراك širāk net, snare, gin; trap │ له نصب شركا to lay a trap for s.o., trap s.o.
شرك spurious, unsound, phony, false
شركة širka, šarika partnership; communion (Chr.); (pl. -āt) association, companionship; company, corporation (com.); commercial enterprise (Isl. Law); establishment, firm; التأمين شركة insurance company; تجارية شرك (tijārīya) trading company, firm; االذاعة شركة broad- 468 casting corporation; المساھمة شركة š. al- musāhama joint-stock company, corporation; سھامية شركة (sihāmīya) do.; الشركات شركة trust (com.)
ašruk, اشرك šuruk, شرك pl. širāk شراك
اشراك ašrāk shoelace
شريك šarīk pl. شركاء šurakā’ , اشراك ašrāk sharer, participant, partner, copartner; associate, companion, confederate, ally; co-owner, coproprietor (Isl. Law); accomplice, accessory (in a crime) │ O موص شريك (mūṣin) silent partner (com.)
شريك šuraik (eg.) sesame cake
شريكة šarīk pl. شرائك šarā’ik woman partner, woman participant, etc. (see
)شريك
at-t. siyāsat سياية التشريك tašrīk: تشريك
policy of alliances
مشاركة mušāraka partnership, copartnership, participation (في in);
cooperation, collaboration; communion (Chr.); complicity, accessoriness (jur.)
اشنراك ištirāk partnership, copartnership, coparcenary; participation, sharing, joining, co-operation, collaboration (في in); interference (في in); subscription (في to); jointness, community; communion (Chr.) ; (pl. -āt) subscription rate; participation fee │باالشتراك jointly, in concurrence, together (مع with); اشتراك شھري (šahrī) monthly subscription; monthly fee or contribution
اشتراكي ištirākī socialist, socialistic; (pl.
-ūn) a socialist
اشتراكية ištirākīya socialism
مشرك mušrik pl. -ūn polytheist
مشترك muštarik pl. -ūn participant; subscriber
مشترك muštarak common, joint, combined, concurrent, collective, co- │ المشترك األمن (amn) collective security;  بالغ مشترك (balāg) joint communiqué; السوق المشترك (sūq) the Common Market; الشعور المشترك community spirit, communality, solidarity; المشترك الضمان (ḍamān) collective security
شركسي šarkašī Circassian; (pl. شراكسة šarākisa) a Circassian
شرم šarama i (šarm) to split, slit, slash (ھ s.th.)
شرم šarm pl. شروم šurūm cleft, crack, split, rift, slit, slot; small hay, inlet
اشرم ašram , f. شرماء šarmā’  having a disfigured nose; harelipped
شرمط šarmaṭa (eg., syr.) to shred, tear to shreds (ھ s.th.)
شرموطة šarmūṭa pl. شراميط šārāmīṭ rag, shred, tatter; whore, slut, prostitute
شرنقة šarnaqa pl. شرانق šarāniq  cocoon (of the silk worm); chrysalis (of an insect); slough (of a snake), snakeskin; -- šarāniq  hemp (Cannahis sativa; bot.); hemp seed
شره šariha a (šarah) to be greedy (الى or على for food); to eat greedily, gormandize, gluttonize, be gluttonous
شره šarah gluttony, gourmandism, ravenousness, voracity; greediness, greed, covetousness, avidity
 شره šarih greedy (على for food), gluttonous; voracious, ravenous; ravenous eater, glutton; greedy, covetous, avid
شراھة šarāha gluttony, gourmandism, ravenousness, voracity; greediness, greed, covetousness, avidity
شرو šarw, širw honey
شروال širwāl pl. شراويل šarāwīl   trousers, pants; drawers
شري ٩٦٤ see شروة، شروى
شرى šarā i (širan, شراء širā’) to sell, vend (ھ ب s.th. for a certain price); to buy, purchase ( ھ s.th.); to bring upon o.s., to ask for (e.g., المتاعب troubles, inconveniences) -- šarā i (širan) to expose (ھ s.th.) to the sun for drying II to expose (ھ s.th.) to the sun for drying VIII to buy, purchase (ھ s.th.); to buy up, acquire, obtain by commercial transaction (ھ s.th.); to sell, vend (ھ s.th.)
X	to become worse, worsen, deteriorate
شرى šary (coll.; n. un. ة) colocynth
شرى širan pl. اشرية ašriya purchase, buy(ing), bargain
شرى šaran an itching skin eruption
راغب │ buy(ing) purchase širā’ شراء المقدرة على الشراء O buy; to eager الشراء aš-š. qūwat قوة الشراء O or (maqdura) power purchasing
شروة šarwa purchase buy(ing)
شروى šarwā: نقير شروى يملك ال lā yamliku š. naqīrin he hasn’t a red cent to his name, he has absolutely nothing; نقير شروى يجدي ال (yujdī) it is of no use at all
aš-šarawīya al-ḥummā الحمى الشروية O
nettle rash, urticaria (med.)
شريان širyān pl. شرايين šarāyīn  artery │ الشرايين تصلب taṣallub aš-š. arteriosclerosis
السدة الشريانية │ arterial širyānī شرياني
(sudda) embolism (med.)
اشتراء ištirā’ purchase buy(ing)
شار šārin pl. شراة šurāh seller, salesman, vendor; purchaser, buyer, customer; -- O lightning rod (also شارى الشراة ؛(الصواعق aš-šurāh designation of the Khawārij
مشتر muštarin purchaser, buyer, customer; seller, vendor
المشترى al-muštarī Jupiter (astron.)
muštarayāt, مشتريات pl. muštaran مشترى
that which is purchased, purchased goods; purchase, buy(ing), acquisition
at askance look to نظر اليه شزرا sażran: شزرا s.o.
شزراء عين ‘ain sazrā’  an eye looking askance, distrustfully or maligrantly; نظرة شزرا (naẓra) distrustful, suspicious glance
شست (Fr. chiste) slate (min.)
شاسع šāsi' far (away), distant, remote; wide, large, great (distance); huge, vast, enormous (difference)
ششخان šašakān rifled (gunbarrel)
firearms aš-š. aṣliḥat اسلحة الششخانة
مششخن mušaškan rifled (gunbarrel)
 ششم šišm seed of the Cassia absus (bot.), used as eye powder
 ششمة šašma, šišma toilet, lavatory, privy
ششنى šišnī sample, specimen; sampling
ششنجي (eg.) šišnagī assayer (of precious metals)
شص šiṣṣ pl. شصوص šuṣūṣ fishhook
شصر šaṣara a kind of gazelle
شط šaṭa i u (شطط šaṭaṭ) to go to extremes, go too far, exceed the proper hounds, be excessive (في in, with); to deviate (عن from), digress, stray (الموضوع عن from the topic) VIII to go to extremes, go too far, exceed the proper bounds, be excessive ( في in, with)
شط šaṭṭ pl. شطوط šuṭūṭ bank, shore, coast, seashore, beach, strand │ العرب شط š. al-‘arab Shatt-al-Arab, river in SE Iraq formed by the Tigris and Euphrates rivers; the region traversed by this river on the Persian Gulf
شطة šaṭṭa a variety of pepper (Capsicum conicum Mey.; bot.) 470
شطط šaṭaṭ that which is excessive or exceeds the proper bounds, excess; inroad, encroachment, infringement
 شطيطة šaṭīṭa a variety of pepper (Capsicum conicum Mey.; bot.)
مشط mušiṭṭ excessive
šaṭ’ān شطآن šawāṭi’ , شواطئ pl. šāṭi’ شاطئ
shore, coast, seacoast, beach, strand
شطب šaṭab u (šaṭb) to out into slices or strips ( ھ s.th.); to strike out, cross out, scratch out, write off (على or ھ s.th.); to erase, efface (على or ھ s.th., e.g., a word, a sentence); to cancel, release (على or ھ a mortgage); to drop, nonsuit (دعوى da‘wā a case) II to make an incision, a longitudinal cut, a slit, a slash (في in s.th.); to strike out, cross out, scratch out, write off (على or ھ s.th.); to erase, efface (على or ھ s.th., e.g., a word, a sentence); to cancel, release, (على or ھ a mortgage); to book, enter, post (ھ an item, an account); to finish off, terminate, wind up (على s.th.)
شطب šaṭb cut, slash; incision, scratch; crossing out, striking out, writing off; erasure, effacement; annulment, cancellation
شطب šaṭb pl. شطوب šuṭūb tall, strapping, sturdy, husky
an of posting تشطيب الحساب tašṭīb: تشطيب ساعة التشطيب ledger); the (to account curfew
شطح šaṭaḥa (šaṭḥ) to roam, rove, stray
شطحة šaṭḥa pl. شطحات šaṭaḥāt escapade
شطر šaṭara ū (šaṭr) to halve, divide into two (equal) parts, bisect, cut through (ھ s.th.); to out off, sever (ھ s.th.); -- بصره شطر (baṣaruhū) u (شطور šuṭūr) to be squint- eyed; -- šaṭara u (شطور šuṭūr, شطورة šuṭūra, شطارة šaṭāra) to withdraw, separate, disassociate o.s. (عن from); - - šaṭara u, šaṭura u (شطارة šaṭāra) to be sly, cunning, artful, shrewd; to be clever, smart, bright, skillful, adroit II to halve, divide into two (equal) parts, to bisect, out through (ھ s.th.) III to halve, share by halves, share equally (ه with s.o., s.th.), go halves (ه with s.o.); to participate, take part (ھ in s.th.), share (ھ s.th.) │ شاطره فرحه آراءه، (ārā’ahū, faraḥahū) to share s.o.’s views, s.o.’s joy V to manifest slyness, cleverness, smartness, adroitness, skill VII to divide, split (ھ into, intrans.)
شطر šaṭr partition, division, separation, halving, bisecting; -- (pl. شطور šuṭūr, اشطر ašṭur) a half, moiety; hemistich; portion, share, lot; direction; šaṭra in the direction of ..., toward │ شطره قصد to move toward s.o., walk up to s.o.; شطره انظاره ولى (wallā anẓārahū) to direct one’s glances toward s.o.; شطره وجھه ولى (wajhahū) to turn one’s face toward  s.th.
شطرة šiṭra side, half
شطارة šaṭāra slyness cunningness shrewdness, adroitness, skill, cleverness, smartness
شطيرة šaṭīra sandwich; schnitzel, steak مشاطرة mušāṭara participation, sharing انشطار inšiṭār fission, splitting,
cleavage, division, separation
شطر šāṭir pl. شطار šuṭṭār sly, cunning, shrewd; scoundrel, villain; clever, smart, bright, adroit, skillful
لوحة الشطرنج │ chess šaṭranj šiṭranj, شطرنج
lauḥat aš-š. chessboard
شطف šaṭafa u (šaṭf) to rinse (under flowing water), clean with water, wash (ھ s.th.)
شطف šuṭfa piece, chunk, lump; (pl,
شطف šutaf) flint (of a gunlook. eg.)
شطفة šiṭfa splinter, chip, sliver 471
 شطن šaṭana u (šaṭn) to fasten, attach, tie, bind (ب ھ s.th. with a rope)
(alphabetically) شيطن see تشيطن and شيطان 
شظف šaẓafa u (šaẓf) to castrate
شظف šaẓaf pl. شظاف šiẓāf discomfort, hardship, difficulty; ruggedness of life │ العيش شظف على اقام (š. il-‘aiš) to lead a life of hardships
شظف šaẓif hard, harsh, rough, rugged, austere (life, character)
شظي šaẓiya a (šaẓan) to be splintered, be shattered, splinter, shiver V do.
شظية šaẓīya pl. šaẓīy, شظايا šaẓāyā
splinter, sliver, chip; shinbone; bone
شع ša‘‘a i (ša‘‘, شعاع ši‘ā’) to disperse, scatter, diffuse, spread; to beam, radiate, flash up IV to emit, spread, diffuse (ھ s.th.); to eradiate (ھ s.th.); to emit rays or
 beams, radiate, beam V to emit rays or beams, radiate, beam, eradiate
شع šu‘‘ rays, beams; spokes
شعاع ša‘ā’ distracted, confused, bewildered, perplexed │ (روحه) فؤاده طار شعاعا his mind became confused, bewildered or perplexed
شعاع šu‘ā’ (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. اشعة aši‘‘a rays, beams; spokes; horizontal wooden crosspieces (on a door or window) │ األشعة البنفسجية فوق (banafsajīya) the ultraviolet rays; األحمر تحت الي األشعة the infra-red rays; اشعة صورة X-ray photograph, roentgenogram; O األشعة فاعلية radioactivity
اشعاع iš‘ā’ pl. -āt radiation, eradiation
اشعاعي iš‘ā‘ī radiative, radiational │ O
radioactive (našāṭ) ذو نشاط اشعاعي
تشعع taša‘‘u‘ radiation, eradiation │ الحراري التشعع (ḥarārī) radiation of heat; الشمسي التشعع (šamsī) solar radiation
مشع muši‘‘ radiating, radiant; emitting rays, radiative; O radioactive
O مشعة muši‘‘a radiator
شعب ša‘aba a (ša‘b) to gather, assemble, rally (ھم people, ھ s.th.); to disperse, scatter (ھم people, ھ s.th.) II to form branches, to branch; to branch (out), ramify, divide into branches or subdivisions (ھ s.th.) V to branch (out), ramify; to b. subdivided, form subdivisions; to diverge, move in different directions, part company, separate, split, break up, become disunited, disorganized, disrupted; to branch off (عن from); to result (عن from)
VIII to branch out, ramify; to branch off
شعب ša‘b pl. شعوب šu‘ūb people, folk; nation; tribe; race
شعبي ša‘bī national, people’s; popular, folksy, folk- (in compounds) │ الشعبية الجبھة (jabha) popular front; شعبية ديموقراطية people’s democracy (in Marxist terminology)
شعبية ša‘bīya popularity
شعوبي šu‘ūbī adherent of the شعوبية, see below
الشعوبية aš-šu‘ūbīya a movement within the early Islamic commonwealth of
nations which refused to recognize the privileged position of the Arabs
شعب ši‘b pl. شعاب ši‘āb mountain path, mountain trail; gorge, ravine, canyon; gulf, abyss; reef
شعبة ši‘ba reef
شعبة šu‘ba pl. شعب šu‘ab, شعاب ši‘āb branch, bough, limb, ramification; shoot, twig, sprig, spray; prong, tine; (sub-) division, section, department, branch, cell; field of study, discipline (e.g., at a university); part, portion; (pl. شعب šu‘ab) bronchus │ الشعب التھاب bronchitis (med.) 472
شعبي šu‘abī bronchial
شعيب ša‘īb disrupted, disorganized, disunited, scattered, dispersed
شعبان ša‘bān  Shaban, name of the eighth month of the Mohammedan year
اشعب aš‘ab  name of a legendary miser, hence, said of s.o. extremely niggardly: اشعب من اطمع greedier than Aš‘ab
اشعبي aš‘abī extremely miserly, avaricious, or greedy; (pl. -ūn) skinflint, miter, niggard │ اشعبي طمع (ṭama‘) insatiable greed
تشعب taša‘‘ub ramification, branching, branching off; disruption, split(ting), disunion
انشعاب inši‘āb ramification, branching, branching off; disruption, split(ting), disunion
متشعب mutaša‘‘ib ramified, branching; manifold, diverse; many-sided, versatile ( متشعب m. al-janabāt)
شعبذ ša‘bada to practice jugglery, legerdemain, sleight of band, or magic
شعبذة ša‘bada jugglery, legerdemain, sleight of band, magic
شعث ša‘itqa a (ša‘at) to be or become disheveled, unkempt, matted (hair) II to dishevel, ruffle (ھ the hair) V to become disheveled, ruffled (hair); to disintegrate, fall apart, decay (of buildings)
شعث ša‘at: شعثه لم lamma ša‘atahū to straighten out the muddled affairs of s.o., help s.o. to get back on his feet; to
 struggle back to one’s feet, “pick up”, recover
شعث ša‘it matted, disheveled, unkempt (hair); having matted, unkempt hair
شعوذ look up alphabetically
شعر ša‘ara u (شعور šu‘ūr) to know (ب s.th., ان that), have knowledge, be cognizant (ب of); to come to know, realize, notice (ب s.th., ان that); to perceive, feel, sense (ب s.th., ان that), be conscious, be aware (ب of s.th.); -- (ši‘r) to make or compose poetry, poetize, versify │ ب اال يشعر لم ... (illā bi-),
و اال يشعر لم ... (illā wa-) and  ،...ب اال شعر ما و اال شعر ما... before be even realized it, there was all of a sudden ... ; then, all of a sudden, there was ..., it happened that … IV to let (ه s.o.) know (ب or ھ s.th., of or about s.th.), notify, inform (ب or ه ھ s.o. of or about), give notice or information (ه to s.o., ب or ھ of or about), impart (ه to s.o., ب or ھ s.th.) X to fee), sense, notice, perceive, realize (ھ ,ب s.th.), be conscious, be aware (ھ of): to be filled (ھ with a feeling)
شعر ša‘r, ša‘ar (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. ,اشعار شعور šu‘ūr, شعار ši‘ār hair; bristles; fur, pelt
شعرة ša‘ra (n. un.) pl. -āt a hair │ ... ال شعرة قدر (qadra š.) not by a hair’s breadth
شعري ša‘rī, ša‘arī hairy, hirsute, hair (adj.)
شعرية ša‘rīya pl. -āt wire grille, wire netting, lattice work; O (without pl.) capillarity │ الشباك شعرية š. aš-šabbāk (latticed) window shade, jalousie
شعرية ši‘rīya vermicelli
شعراني ša‘rānī hairy, hirsute, shaggy
شعر ši‘r knowledge │ شعري ليت laita ši‘rī I wish I knew ...! would that I
knew ...! -- (pl. اشعار aš‘ār) poetry; poem
شعري ši‘rī poetic(al)
شعرى ša‘rā pl. شعارى ša‘ārā scrub country 473
الشعرى aš-ši‘rā Sirius, Dog Star (astrron.)
aš‘ira اشعرة šu‘ur, شعر pl. ši‘ār شعار
password, watchword; slogan; motto,
device; mark, token, sign; signal; distinguishing mark or feature, characteristic, emblem, badge │ شعار تجاريI ši‘ār (tijārī) trade mark
شعير ša‘īr (coll.) barley; (n. un. ة) barleycorn │ لؤلؤي شعير (lu’lu’ī) pearl barley; الجفن شعيرة š. al-jafn sty (med.)
O شعيرة ša‘īra bead (of a gun sight,
mil.; Syr.)
دموية شعيرات šu‘airāt damawīya blood capillaries (biol.)
شعيرية ša‘īrīya vermicelli
شعور šu‘ūr knowledge, cognizance; consciousness, awareness; perception, discernment; perceptive faculty; sensation; sentiment; feeling; perceptiveness, sensitivity, sensibility; mood │ منه شعور غير على (gairi šu‘ūrin) without his being aware of it; عن غاب الشعور to lose consciousness; الشعور فاقد unconscious, insensible; بالنفس الشعور (nafs) self-consciousness; بالذات الشعور do.; دقة الشعور diqqat aš-š. sensitivity, sensibility; المشترك الشعور (muštarak) community  spirit, communality, solidarity; الشعور عديم unreeling, insensitive
شعوري šu‘ūrī conscious; emotional │ ال شعوري unconscious, subconscious
شعارى ša‘ārā (pl.) goats
شعيرة ša‘īra pl. شعائر ša‘ā’ir  religious ceremony, rite, cultic practice; pl. also: places of worship, cultic shrines
اشعر aš‘ar hairy, hirsute, long-haired, shaggy
شعرور šu‘rūr poetaster, versifier, rhymester
شويعر šuwai‘ir poetaster, venifier, rhymester
شعر maš‘ar pl. مشاعر mašā‘ir  cultic shrine for ceremonies of the hadj; sensory organ; pl. senses, feelings, sensations │ الحرام المشعر (ḥarām) the hadj station of Muzdalifa east of Mecca
اشعار iš‘ār pl. -āt notification, information (ب of, about), notice
 شاعر šā‘ir knowing (by instinctive perception), endowed with deeper insight, with intuition; (pl. الشعراء šu‘arā’ ) poet
شاعرية šā‘irīya pl. -āt poetry; poetical work, poetization; poetical talent; poet- ship
شواعر šawā‘ir attacks, diatribes, invectives, calumnies, defamations
مشعور maš‘ūr split, cracked; mad, crazy, idiotic
مشعراني muš‘irānī hairy, hirsute, shaggy
شعشع ša‘ša‘a to mix with water, dilute (ھ a beverage); to shine, beam, radiate, glitter
شعشع muša‘ša‘ half drunk, tipsy, fuddled
شعط ša‘aṭa a to scorch, sear, singe
شعفة ša‘f□a pl. شعاف ši‘āf summit, top, peak
شعل ša‘ala a (ša‘l), II and IV to light, kindle, ignite, inflame, set on fire (ھ s.th.), set fire (ھ to s.th.); to set ablaze, fan (ھ s.th.) VIII to catch fire, start burning, ignite, bum, flame, blaze, flare up, break out (fire) │ غضبا اشتعل (gaḍaban) to be flaming with rage; شيبا رأسه اشتعل (šaiban) his hair was, or turned, white
شعلة šu‘la pl. شعل šu‘al fire, blaze, flame; torch
مشاعل pl. maš‘ala مشعلة maš‘al, مشعل
mašā‘il  torch
مشعال miš‘āl torch 474
mašā‘ilīya مشاعلية pl. mašā‘ilī مشاعلي
torch bearer; hangman, executioner
اشعال iš‘āl lighting, kindling, ignition, setting on fire, fanning
اشتعال išti‘āl ignition, inflammation, combustion, burning
مشتعل mušta‘il burning, ablaze, on fire
شعنينة ša‘nīna pl. شعانين ša‘ānīn  palm branch │ الشعانين (عيد) احد aḥad (‘īd) al-š. Palm Sunday (Chr.)
شعواء ša‘wā’  (used attributively with غارة gāra, حرب ḥarb, حملة ḥamla, and the like) large-scale, devastating everything (over a wide area)
شعوذ šawada to practice jugglery, legerdemain, sleight of band, or magic arts
شعوذة ša‘wada pl. -āt jugglery, legerdemain, sleight of hand; magic, magic arts; humbug, swindle, tricks
مشعوذ muša‘wid juggler, conjurer, magician, practitioner of legerdemain; swindler, trickster (f. مشعوذة)
شغب šagaba, šagiba a (šagb, šagab) to disturb the peace, make trouble, stir up riots, cause an uproar, riot; to provoke discord, dissension, or controversy (among على، ب، ه) III to make trouble, disturb the peace; to rebel (على against), mutiny
شغب šagab, šagb unrest, trouble, disturbance, discord, dissension; riot, commotion, uproar, strife, tumult; brawl, fight, broil, fracas; row, wrangle, contention, quarrel, controversy
شغب šaggāb troublemaker, agitator, subverter
شغوب šagūb causing much noise and unrest, riotous, turbulent, troublous
مشاغب mašāgib  troubles, disorders, disturbances
مشاغبة mušāgaba pl. -āt disorder, disturbance, trouble, riot, uproar; rebellion (على against); discord, dissension, row, wrangle, quarrel, controversy
مشاغب mašāgib pl. -ūn troublemaker, agitator, subverter, rioter, mischief-maker
شغر šagara II (شغور šugūr) to be devoid of fortifications, be unprotected (country); to be free, vacant, unoccupied, open (seat, position)
شغور šugūr vacancy (of a position)
شاغر šāgir empty and unprotected (of a country); free, vacant, unoccupied, open (seat, position); شواغر šawāgir  vacancies
شغف šagafa a (šagf) (to hit, or affect, the pericardium, i.e.) to infatuate, enamor, fill with ardent passion (ه s.o.); pass. به شغف حبا)) šugifa bihī (ḥubban) to love s.o. or s.th. passionately, be madly in love with s.o., be infatuated with or enamored of s.o., be extremely fond of s.th. VII به انشغف
= šugifa bihī
 شغف šagaf pericardium; passionate love, passion, sensual desire; infatuation, enamoredness, amorousness; ardent zeal, craze, love, passion
شغف šagif madly in love, infatuated (ب with), enamored (ب of), fascinated (ب by)
شغاف šigāf pericardium
شغوف šagūf obsessed with fervent affection (ب for); madly in love, infatuated (ب with), enamored (ب of)
مشغوف mašgūf passionately fond (ب of), madly in love, infatuated (ب with), enamored (ب of), fascinated (ب by)
شغل šagala a (šagl, šugl) to occupy, busy (ب ه
s.o. with); to preoccupy (ه s.o.), keep (ه s.o.) busy, give (ه s.o.) trouble; 475 to distract, divert, alienate (عن ه s.o. from s.th.).; to occupy, fill, hold, have (ھ office, seat, position); to take up, fill (ھ s.th.), engage, engross (ھ the attention); to engage, tie down (ھ forces of the opponent); -- pass. šugila to occupy o.s., busy o.s. be busy (ب with), be engaged in; to be taken up, occupied (ب by, e.g., ground by buildings); عن به شغل to be distracted by s.th. from │ ب نفسه شغل to occupy o.s., busy o.s. with, work at, attend to; البال شغل to disquiet, discomfit, make uneasy, trouble, disturb; ل الوقت شغل (waqt) to devote tim, to II to busy, occupy (ه s.o.), engage, engross (ھ s.th.); to employ (ه s.o.), provide employment (ه for s.o.); to put (ه s.o.) to work, make (ھ a machine) work, put in operation, make run, start (ھ a machine); to make, produce, manufacture, fabricate (ھ s.th.); to invest ( ھ money) III to hold in play, keep occupied, divert (ه s.o.); to distract (ه s.o.) IV to occupy, busy, employ (ه s.o.); to occupy, hold, fill, have ( an office, a position); to fill, take up (ه s.th.), engage, engross (ھ the attention); to cover (ھ ب a space with a building or buildings), occupy, take up, fill (ھ ب a space with); to take, take up, require (ھ time); to engage, tie down (ھ forces of the opponent); to distract, divert, alienate, entice away (عن ه from) │ البال اشغل to disquiet, discomfit, make uneasy, trouble, disturb, preoccupy VI to occupy o.s., busy o.s. be occupied or busy, be preoccupied (ب with), be
engaged (ب in), attend, devote o.s. (ب to s.th.); to pretend to be busy VII to occupy o.s., busy o.s. be occupied or busy, be preoccupied (ب with); to be concerned (ب about) VIII to busy o.s. occupy o.s. be occupied or busy (ب or في with), be engaged (ب or في in), attend, devote o.s. ( في or فيto s.th.); to work; to study (Jo under or with); to work, run, operate, be in operation, be in motion (machine, and the like) │ قلبه اشتغل (qalbuhū) to be uneasy, apprehensive, worried; عن به اشتغل to be distracted by s.th. from
شغل šugl occupancy, filling, taking up; detention, prevention, distraction (عن from); -- (pl. اشتغال ištigāl, شغول šugūl) occupation, activity; work, job; business, concern │ شغل شاغل that which ie uppermost in one’s mind, chief or foremost concern; s.th. which preoccupies s.o.’s mind or distracts s.o. (عن from);
شاقة اشغال (šāqqa) hard labor; عامة اشغال (‘āmma) or عمومية اشغال (‘umūmīya) public works; يدوي شغل (yadawī) handwork; manual labor; يد شغل š. yad (colloq., used appositionally) handmade; شغل في preoccupied (من with), concerned (من about); ب شغل في busy, occupied with; كان عن شغل في to be too busy or preoccupied ( ب with) to be able to attend to s.th.; الزم شغلك ilzam šuglaka mind your own business!
شغال šaggāl very busy; hard-working, industrious, diligent, laborious, active; being in operation, running (of a machine); (pl. -ūn) worker, workman, laborer
شغيل šaggīl pl. ة (syr.) worker, workman, laborer, (lowly) employee
شاغول šāgūl mainsheet (of a sailing vessel)
مشغل mašgal pl. مشاāغل mašāgil 
workshop; workhouse
شغلة pl. مشاغل mašāgil  occupation, avocation, activity, business, concern, work, job; effort, exertion; diversion, distraction, preoccupation, disturbance
تشغيل tašgīl employment, occupation; providing of employment, provision of work; hiring (of s.o., as a worker);
 opening, starting, putting into operation; 476 production, manufacture, making; investment (of money)
انشغال inšigāl (state of) being busy or occupied; occupation, activity; overcharge, overwork; apprehension, concern, anxiety
اشتغال ištigāl (state of) being busy or occupied; work, occupation (ب or في with, at); syntactical regimen, government (of a word by another; gram.)
شاغل šāgil pl. شواغل šawāgil that which preoccupies s.o., engrosses s.o.’s attention, takes up s.o.’s time; occupation, activity; object of concern or worry; pl. شواغل distractions, preoccupations │ وجد في عنه شاغال be found distraction from it in
…; عن شاغل الف في ھو (alfi šāgilin) he had a thousand other things to think of than ...; له شاغل اكبر كان (akbara šāgilin) it was his greatest worry
مشغول mašgūl busy, occupied (ب with); distracted, diverted (عن from); occupied, taken (seat, space); busy, occupied (telephone line, and the like); worked on, processed │ البال مشغول anxious, apprehensive, concerned, worried;
fiḍḍīya) (dahabīya, المشغوالت الذھبية والفضية work silver and gold
مشغولية mašgūlīya anxiety, apprehension, concern
مشغل mušaggal employee, worker
مشتغل muštagil busy, occupied (ب or في with); in operation, running (of a machine)
lip; šafawāt شفوات šifāh, شفاه pl. šafa شفة lip, upper (‘ulyā) الشفة العليا │ edge rim, š. شفة األرنب lip; lower (suflā) الشفة السفلى
word š. bint بنت شفة harelip; a1-arnab شفه see مشافھة and شفاھي، شفاھا، شفھى شفو see شفوي
  شفائف šafā’if , شفايف šafāyif  lips
 شف šaffa i (شفوف šufūf, شفيف šafīf, شفف šafaf) to be thin, flimsy; to be transparent, diaphanous, translucid, pellucid; to let (عن s.th.) shimmer through, reveal, disclose, betray (عن s.th.) VIII to drink up, drain, empty (ھ s.th.); to eat up, devour (ھ s.th.)
X to look (ھ through s.th., e.g.. through a piece of fabric in order to ascertain its quality); to have a glimpse (ھ of s.th.), hope (ھ for s.th.); to try to see (ھ through s.th.), seek to penetrate (ھ s.th.); to perceive, discern, make out (ھ s.th.); to shimmer (من through s.th.), show (من through s.th.); to manifest itself, become tangible, perceptible, noticeable
شف šaff, šiff pl. شفوف šufūf diaphanous fabric, gauze
شفف šafaf transparency, translucence, diaphaneity
شفيف šafīf thin, flimsy, translucent, transparent, diaphanous
شفوف šufūf transparancy, translucence, diaphaneity
شفافة šufāfa the rest in the glass
شفاف šaffāf thin, flimsy, translucent, transparent, diaphanous
شفافية šaffāfīya transparency, translucence, diaphaneity
شفت šift pl. شفوت šufūt (eg.) pincers, tweezers
شفتر šaftara to pout, sulk
شفتورة šaftūra thick lip
جفتجي see شفتشي جفتلك see شفتلك
 شفر šafr pl. اشفار ašfār palpebral margin from which the eyelashes grow, (outer) edge of the eyelid; edge, rim, border, fringe
شفر šufr pl. اشفار ašfār palpebral margin from which the eyelashes grow, 477 (outer) edge of the eyelid; edge, rim, border. fringe; -- labium (anat.)
شفرة šafra pl. šafarāt, شفار šifār large knife; blade (of a sword, of a knife); razor blade; (pl. شفار) brink, edge, verge │ على الھاوية شفرة on the brink of the abyas
شفير šafīr palpebral margin from which the eyelashes grow; (outer) edge of the eyelids; edge, rim, border, fringe
مشفر mišfar pl. مشافر mašāfir  flew, chap; trunk, snout, proboscis
 شفر (Fr. chiffre) cipher, code
شفري šifrī ciphered, coded, in code
 شفرة šifra cipher, code
شفشف šafšafa to dry, dry out, parch, drain (ھ s.th.)
شفط la/ala to suck, suck up, absorb; to empty, drain; to sip
شفاطة šaffāṭa pl. -āt siphon │ O شفاطة الغبار š. al-gubār vacuum cleaner
شفع šafa‘a a (šaf‘) to double (ھ s.th.); to attach, add, subjoin (ب ھ to s.th. s.th.), enclose (ب ھ in s.th. s.th.); to give the (right of) pre-emption (ب ه to s.o. on s.th.), grant (ه s.o.) the lint refusal (ب of s.th.); -- (شفاعة šafā‘a) to mediate, use one’s good offices, put in a good word, intercede, intervene, plead (ل or في for or on behalf of s.o., الى with s.o. else) V to mediate, use one’s good offices, put in a good word, intercede, intervene, plead (الى ل or في for or on behalf of s.o. with s.o. else)
شفع šaf‘ pl. اشفاع ašfā‘, شفاع šifā‘ either part of a pair; even number
شفع šaf‘ diplopia, double vision of a single object
شفعي šaf‘ī even (of a number)
شفعة šuf‘a (right of) pre-emption
شفيع šafī‘ pl. شفعاء šufa‘ā’  mediator, intercessor, advocate; patron saint (Chr.); holder of the right of pre-emption, preemptor
شفاعة šafā‘a mediation, intercession, advocacy
شافع šāfi‘ mediator, intercessor, advocate; holder of the right of pre- emption, pre-emptor
الشافععي aš-šāfi‘ī founder of one of the four orthodox Islamic schools of theology; شافعي Shafiitic; (pl. -ūn, شوافع šawāfi‘) adherent of the Shafiitic school, Shafiite
مشفوع mašfū‘ accompanied (ب by), attended, combined (ب with)
شفق IV to pity, commiserate (على s.o.), feel pity (على for), sympathize (على with); to be concerned (ان that, على about) worry (ان that, على about), fear (ان that, على for, من s.o., s.th.), be apprehensive, feel anxiety ( على about, من as a result of); to shun, shirk
(من s.th.), beware (من of), be on one’s guard (من against)
شفق šafaq evening glow, twilight, dusk
australis; aurora (janūbī) الشفق الجنوبي │ الشفق borealis; aurora (šamālī) الشفق الشمالي Twilight شفق اآللھة light; polar (quṭbī) القطبي Gods the of
شفقة šafaqa compassion, commiseration, pity, sympathy, kind(li)ness, tenderness, affectionateness, solicitude, loving care │ الشفقة عديم pitiless, merciless
شفوق šafūq compassionate, sympathetic, affectionate, tender, solicitous, kind(ly)
شفيق šafīq compassionate, sympathetic, affectionate, tender, solicitous, kind(ly)
اشفاق išfāq compassion, pity, sympathy; tenderness, affectionateness; care, solicitude; concern, worry, anxiety, apprehension 478
شافن šāfin proud
شفه III to speak (mouth to mouth) (ه to s.o.)
شف   see شفاه، شفوات pl. شفه
شفھي šafahī lip-, labio- (in compounds), labial; oral; الشفھي orals (= oral examination); شفھيا šafahīyan orally │ الشفھية الحروف the labials b, f, m, w (phon.)
شفاھا šifāhan orally
شفاھي šifāhī oral; الشفاھي the orals (= oral examination); شفاھيا šifāhīyan orally
مشافھة mušāfahatan orally
شفو IV to be very close (على to s.th.), be on the verge, on the brink of s.th. (به اشفى │ (على اليأس حافة على (ḥāffat al-ya’s) he brought him to the brink of despair
شفا šafan pl. شفاء ašfā’ edge, rim, border, brink, verge
شفوي šafawī lip-, labio- (in compounds), labial; oral; شفويا šafawīyan orally │ الشفوية الحروف the labials b, f, m, w (phon.)
مشف mušfin moribund, doomed to death
شفى šafā i (شفاء šifā’) to cure (من ه s.o. of a disease), heal (من ه s.o. of a disease, ھ a wound), make (ه s.o.) well, restore (ه s.o.)
 to health; -- pass. šufya to be healed, be cured, be restored to health, recover, convalesce, recuperate; to heal, heal up (wound) │ غليله) غلته شفي) (gullatahū) to quench one’s thirst, gratify one’s desire, satisfy one’s thirst for revenge; غيظه شفي من (gaiẓahū) to vent one’s anger on s.o., take it out on s.o. V and VIII to be cured, be healed, be restored to health (ب by); to take revenge, avenge o.s., satisfy one’s thirst for revenge, vent one’s anger, take it out (من on) X to seek a cure
شفاء šifā’ cure, healing, restoration, recovery, recuperation, convalescence; satisfaction, gratification; (pl. اشفية ašfiyah, اشاف ašāfin) remedy, medicament, medication, medicine │ للشفاء قابل curable
شفائي `sifā’ī healing, curative, medicative
مشفى mašfan pl. مشاف mašāfīn  hospital
تشف tašaffin gratification of one’s thirst for revenge, satisfaction
استشفاء istišfā’ seeking of a cure; cure, (course of) treatment
شاف šāfin healing, curative, medicative, salutary; satisfactory, clear, unquivocal (of an answer)
مستشفى mustašfā pl. مستشفيات mustaštayāt hospital; field hospital; sanitorium │ المجاذيب مستشفى insane asylum, mental hospital
شق šaqqa u (šaqq) to split, cleave, part, tear, rend, rip (ھ s.th.); to break (ھ s.th.); to plow, till, break up (ھ the ground); ھto furrow, traverse, cross (ھ s.th.); to pass go, travel (ھ through a region); to break (dawn); -- (شقوق šuqūq) to break forth, shoot up, sprout (plant), break through, erupt (tooth); -- (šaqq, مشقة mašaqqa) to be heavy, oppressive, burden some unbearable (على for s.o.); to grieve, trouble (على s.o.); to molest, harass inconvenience (على s.o.), be troublesome, cumbersome ( على for s.o.); to visit (على s.o.). call (على upon s.o.) │ جيبه شقت (jaibahā) to tear the front of the garment as a sign of mourning (woman); سبيال شق to cut, or open, a way for o.s.; السكون شق to break the silence; شق طريقا) شارعا) to build a street (a road); شق طريقه to force one’s way, plow ahead; شق
جديدا طريقا to open up, or enter upon, a new path 479
(fig.); العصا شق (‘aṣā) to part from the community, break with the community; الطاعة عصا شق (‘aṣā ṭ-ṭā‘a) to rebel, revolt, renounce allegiance; القوم عصا شق (‘aṣā l- qaum) to sow discord among people; شق ما غبارھم (gubārahum) he did not reach their mark; غباره يشق ال (yušaqqu gubaruhū) he is unsurpassable, he is incomparable, there is no one like him II to split (ھ s.th.); to tear open, rip open, slit open (ھ s.th.) V to be split, be cleft; to split, crack, bunt; to be cracked VII to be split, be cleft; to split, crack, burst; to split off, separate, segregate, secede, break away, withdraw ( عن from), break (عن with), renounce (عن s.th.); to become a schismatic (Chr.); to break (dawn) │ عصاھم انشقت (‘aṣāhum) they fell out (with one another); انشقت مرارته (marāratuhū) he exploded (with anger), he blew his top VIII to derive (ھ من word from)
شق šaqq pl. شقوق šuqūq fissure, crack, chink, crevice, rift, cleft, crevasse, chasm, split, rent, tear, rip, gap, slit, slot; half, moiety; -- fission, splitting, cracking, cleavage │ الذرة شق š. ad-darra atomic fission
شق šiqq half, side, part, portion; trouble, difficulty, hardship │ المعارضة شق š. al-mu‘āraḍa opposition party; اال ... ال األنفس بشق (illā bi-šiqqi l-anfus), النفس بشق only with great effort, with great difficulty, barely
شقة šaqqa rift, tear, rip, fissure, crack, split, crevice
شقة šiqqa pl. شقق šiqaq, شقاق šiqāq a half, moiety; piece; splinter; trouble, toil, labor, difficulty, hardship; difficult journey; destination of a journey; distance
شقة šiqqa, šaqqa pl. شقق šiqaq apartment, flat, split-level apartment; compertmeut (in a train)
شقة šuqqa pl. شقق šuqaq trouble, toil, labor, difficulty, hardship; difficult journey; destination of a journey; distance
│ الشقة بعد bu‘d aš-šuqqa (and aš-šiqqa) large or wide distance; الشقة بعيد b. aš-šiqqa (and aš-šiqqa) far away, distant, remote
 شقيق šaqīq a half, moiety; (pl. اشقة ašiqqa, اشقاء ašiqqā’) full brother, brother on the paternal and maternal side; (attributively) brother-, sister-; -- anemone
│ الشقيق القطر (quṭr) the brother country; الشقيقة الدول (duwal) the sister states (esp. with reference to Arab countries)
شقيقة šaqīqa pl. -āt, شقائق šaqā’iq  full sister, sister on the paternal and maternal side; hemicrania, migraine │ النعمان شقائق š. an-nu‘mān red anemones (bot.)
اشق ašaqq  more troublesome, more tiresome, more difficult, harder
مشقة mašaqqa pl. -āt, مشاق mašāqq 
trouble, toil, labor, difficulty, hardship
شقاق šiqāq disunity, dissension, discord
انشقاق inšiqāq separation, segregation, dissociation, spilt; schism (Chr.); dissension, discord, disunion
اشتقاق ištiqāiq derivation, etymology (of a word)
شاق šāqq troublesome, tiresome, wearisome, cumbersome, tiresome, tedious, fatiguing, arduous, onerous, difficult, hard │ شاقة اشغال hard labor
مشاق mušāqq schismatic (Chr.)
مشتق muštaqq pl. -āt derivative (gram.)
شقح IV to send far away, remove to a distant place (ه s.o.)
شقذف šuqduf pl. شقاذف šaqādif  a kind of sedan 480
شقر šaqira a (šaqar) and šaqura u (شقرة šuqra) to be of fair complexion, be light skinned; to be blond, fair-haired
شقر šaqar fair-complexionedness; blondness
شقرة šuqra fair-complexionedness; blondness; redness
اشقر ašqar , f. شقراء šaqrā’ , pl. شقر šuqr fair-complexioned, light skinned; blond, fair-haired; reddish
شقرق saqraqa to be gay, cheerful, be exhilarated, amuse o.s.
شقشق šaqšaqa to twitter, peep, chirp; to babble (ب s.th.); to peep, break (dawn) │ شقشق عن بالحديث to chat, chatter about s.th.
شقشقة šaqšaqa pl. -āt twitter(ing), peopling), chirp(ing); (silly) prattle; pl. شقاشق šaqāšiq  rigmarole, rambling talk │ اللسان شقشقة (silly) prattle; النھار شقشقة s. an- nahār daybreak, peep of dawn
شقشقة šiqšiqa pl. شقاشق šaqāšiq  faucal bag of the camel
شقف šaqaf (coll.; n. un. ة) (pot)sherds
شقافة šuqāfa (pot)sherds
  شاقل šāqil shekel
 شاقول šāqūl plumbline, plummet
شقلب šaqlaba to turn things upside down, upset things II tašaqlaba to be upset, be toppled; to turn a somersault
شقلبة šaqlaba pl. -āt somersault
(شقو and شقا (شقي šaqā u (شقو šaqw) to make (ه s.o.) unhappy, miserable, wretched, distress (ه s.o.); -- شقي šaqiya a ( شقاء šaqā’, شقاوة saqāwa, شقوة šaqwa) to be unhappy, miserable, wretched, distressed; to have trouble (ب with, in s.th.) IV to make (ه s.o.) unhappy, miserable, wretched, distress (ه s.o.)
شقاء šaqā’ and شقا saqan misfortune, distress, misery, wretchedness, pain, suffering; hardship, trouble, toil, drudgery
شقي šaqīy pl. اشقياء ašqiyā’  unhappy, unlucky, miserable, wretched, distressed; damned; wretch, villain, culprit, criminal, scoundrel, rogue; nasty, naughty, mischievous
شقوة šaqwa misfortune, distress, misery
شقاوة saqāwa misfortune, distress, misery; mischief, nastiness, naughtiness
 شك šakka u (šakk) to pierce, transfix (ه s.o. ب with); to impale, spit (ب ھ s.th. on); to prick, stab (ھ s.th.); to doubt (ب or في s.o., s.th.); to distrust, suspect, question (ب or في s.o., s.th.), entertain doubts, have misgivings (ب or في about s.o., about s.th.); to be skeptical II to make (ه s.o.) doubt (في s.th.), fill (ه s.o.) with doubt, misgivings, skepticism, suspicion (في about) V to doubt (ب or في s.o., s.th.), have doubts (ب or في about); to be skeptical, have misgivings
 شك šakk pl. شكوك šukūk doubt, uncertainty, suspicion, misgiving │ شك بال (bi-lā), شك ال (šakka), شك وال wa-lā šakka, شك دون من min dūni šakk without doubt, doubtless, undoubtedly, indubitably, certainly, positively; فيه الشك الى سبيل ال (sabīla) doubtless, indubitable, beyond any doubt; الشك اليه يتطرق ال (yataṭarraqu, šakku) do.
شكة šakka stab, tšhrust, jab (with the point of a weapon)
تشكك tašakkuk doubt; skepticism
شاك šākk doubting, in doubt, skeptical
the to armed شاك في السالح or شاك السالح │ arms with bristling teeth,
فيه مشكوك maškūk fīhi doubtful, dubious, uncertain; امره في مشكوك (amrihī) suspect(ed) 481
 شكك šakkaka (eg.) to sell on credit; to buy on credit; to borrow
شكك šukuk (eg.) on credit
 شك (Fr. chèque) pl. شكات check
 شكر šakara u (šukr, شكران šukrān) to thank (ل or ه s.o., على or ل or ه for s.th.), be thankful, grateful (ل or ه to s.o., على or ل or ه for s.th.); to praise, laud, extol (ل or ه s.o.) │ عليه يشكر (yuškaru) worthy of thanks, deserving acknowledgment, meritorious, praiseworthy V to thank (ل ھ
s.o. for s.th.), be thankful, grateful (ل ھ to
s.o. for s.th.)
شكر šukr pl. شكور šukūr thankfulness, gratefulness, gratitude; thanks, acknowledgment; praise, laudation │ شكرا لك šukran lak I thank you! thanks! شكره جزيال شكرا to express many thanks to s.o.
شكري šukrī of thanks, thanking
شكران šukrān thankfulness, gratefulness, gratitude; thanks, acknowledgment; praise, laudation
شكور šakūr very thankful
شاكر šākir thankful, grateful
مشكور maškūr worthy of thanks, deserving acknowledgment, meritorious, praiseworthy
 شكارة šikāra pl. شكائر šakā’ir  (eg.) sack, gunny sack
 شوكران look up alphabetically
 شيكران look up alphabetically
شكس šakusa u (شكاسة šakāsa) and šakisa a (šakas) to be malicious, spiteful, querulous, quarrelsome, peevish, petulant, ill-tempered, morose, surly, sullen, sulky, grumpy, unfriendly III to pick a quarrel, to quarrel (ه with s.o.) VI to quarrel (with one another), be querulous, quarrelsome, petulant; to be incongruous
شكس šakis pl. شكس šuks malicious, spiteful, querulous, quarrelsome, peevish, petulant, ill-tempered, morose, surly, sullen, sulky, grumpy, unfriendly
شكاسة šakāsa malice, spite, querulousness, peevishness, petulance, ill- temperedneess, moroseness, surliness, sullenness, sulkiness, grumpiness, unfriendliness; rudeness
مشاكسة mušākasa pl. -āt quarrel, controversy, dispute, wrangle; plot, conspiracy; moroseness, surliness, grumpiness; petulance, nagging, querulousness
تشاكس tašākus incongruity, absurdity
شاكوش and شكوش look up alphabetically
شكل šakala u (šakl) to hobble (بالشكال ھ an animal with the šikāl, q.v.); to vowel, point, provide with vowel points (ھ a text); to be dubious, ambiguous, equivocal, vague, obscure, intricate, difficult II = I; to shape, fashion, form, create, mold, organize, build up (ھ s.th.); to diversify, vary, variegate (ھ s.th.), bring variety (ھ into s.th.) III to be similar (ه ھ، to s.o., to s.th.), resemble (ه ھ، s.o.,
s.th.), be like s.o. or s.th. (ه ھ،) IV to be dubious, ambiguous, equivocal, vague, obscure, intricate, difficult (على for s.o.) V to be formed, fashioned, shaped, molded, created, organized, built up, take form, take shape; to be variegated, shaded, graded, form various gradation; to materialize, appear in visible form (ل to s.o.) │ بشكله تشكل (bi-šaklihī) to take on the shape of s.o., assume the form of s.th. X to regard as dubious (ه s.th.); = IV
šukūl شكول aškāl, اشكال pl. šakl شكل
similarity, resemblance, likeness; outward
 appearance, figure, form, shape, build; form of perception, perceptual form (as opposed to matter or content; philos.); 482 type, out, pattern; mode, manner; sort, kind, specimen; شكل vowelization, voweling; شكال formally, in form │ ھم وأشكالھم they and the like of them
شكلي šaklī formal; pl. شكليات formalities O شكلية šaklīya formalism
شكل šikl coquetry, coquettishness
شكلة šakila coquettish woman, coquette, flirt
شكلي šuklī quarrelsome, peevish
شكل šikal pl. -āt, شكل šukul fetter, hobble (for shackling the feet of a riding animal)
تشكيل taškīl pl. -āt forming, formation, shaping, molding, fashioning, creation, organization, building up; order of march (mil.); pl. تشكيالت formations; organizations
تشكيلة taškīla assortment, selection, variety; formation
مشاكلة mušākala similarity, resemblance, likeness
اشكال iškāl dubiosity, ambiguity, obscurity, vagueness
تشاكل tašākul similarity, resemblance
شاكلة šākila way, manner, mode; (pl. شواكل šawākil ) flank, side, groin │ على شاكلة in the manner of, of the kind of, like, شاكلتھم على of their kind, like them; على كان شاكلتھم to be of the same kind, of the same strain as s.th.
مشكل mušakkal different, diverse, manifold, miscellaneous, variegated; vowel(iz)ed
مشكل muškil turbid, murky (liquid); dubious, ambiguous, equivocal, obscure, vague, hazy; difficult, intricate, involved, problematic; problem, unsolved question, issue; difficulty
مشكلة muškila pl. -āt, مشاكل mašākil  problem, unsolved question, issue; difficulty
شكم šakama u (šakm) to bridle (ھ an animal); to bribe (ه s.o.); to silence, gag, muzzle (s.o.)
شكيمة šakīma pl. شكائم šakā’im , شكم šukum, شكيم šakīm bit, curb, snaffle, bridoon; (pl. شكائم) O brake (of a wheel); unruliness, unyieldingness obstinacy; contempt, disdain, scorn │ الشكيمة شديد stubborn, obstinate, unyielding; الشكيمة قوة quwwat aš-š. energy; الشكيمة قوي qawīy aš- š. energetic, vigorous, active
شكه III to resemble (ھ s.th.), he like s.th. (ھ)
شكو) شكا) šakā u (شكو šakw, شكوى šakwā, شكاة šakāh, شكاية šikāya, شكية šakīya) to complain (من or ه ھ، of, about, ل or الى to s.o., من or ھ of or about s.th.), make a complaint; to raise or lodge a complaint (من or ه ھ، of, about or against s.o., ل or الى with s.o.); to suffer (ھ from s.th.) V = I; VI to complain to one another (ھ of, about s.th.) VIII = I
شكوة šakwa complaint, grievance; (pl. شكوات šakawāt, شكاء šikā’) small skin (for water or milk)
شكوى šakwā pl. شكاوى šakāwā complaint; accusation; suffering, grievance
شكاة šakāh complaint; accusation; suffering, grievance
شكاية šikāya complaint; accusation; suffering, grievance
شكية šakīya complaint; accusation; suffering, grievance
شكاء šakkā’ given to complaining, querulous
مشكاة miškāh pl. مشكاوات miškāwāt, مشاك mašākin niche (for a lamp); lamp, pendent lamp 483
شاكي │ plaintiff complainant, šākin شاك as-s. šākk السالح = شاك السالح
(مشكو (منه maškūw complained of, accused, charged; an accused, defendant
مشتك muštakin complainant, plaintiff
عليه مشتكى muštaka ‘alaihi complained of, accused, charged; an accused, defendant
 شكوريا šikūriyā chicory
شكوالته šukūlāta (eg.), šikōlāta (syr.), chocolate
(alphabetically) شاكوش see شكوش and شاكوش
شل šalla a (šall, شلل šalal) to dry up, wither, become crippled, stunted; to be paralyzed, be lame; -- šalla u to paralyze (ھ s.th.) │ حركته شل (ḥarakatahū) to overwhelm s.o., الring s.o. down IV to cause (ھ the hand) to wither; to paralyze (ھ s.th.); to neutralize, bring to a stand-still (ھ s.th.)
VII to be paralyzed, be lamed
شلة šalla destination (of a journey)
شلة šilla pl. شلل šilal hank, skein (of yarn); coil, spool; party, group
شلل šalal paralysill, pelsy, paralyzation (also fig.) │ األطفال شلل š. al-aṭfāl, الشلل الطفلي (ṭiflī) infantile paralysis, poliomyelitis; االھتزازي الشالل (ihtizāzī) paralysis agitans, Parkinson’s disease
شالل šallāl pl. -āt cataract, waterfall, rapids
اشل ašall , f. شالء šallā’  withered, stunted (hand); paralyzed, lame; a paralytic
مشلول mašlūl paralyzed, lame
شلبي šalabī dandyish, foppish; dandy, fop; (pal.) nice, handsome, beautiful
 شلت II to kick
  شلتة šalta pl. -āt, شلت šilat mattress
شلح šalaḥa a (šalḥ) to take off (ثيابه tiyābahū one’s clothes); to shed the cloth (ھ), renounce the ministry (monk, prieat) II to
undress, disrobe, strip (ه s.o.); to roh, plunder (ه s.o.)
مشلح mašlaḥ pl. مشالح mašāliḥ, (syr., nejd.) long, sowing cloak of wool or camel’s hair, also one with gold embroidery
تشليح tašlīḥ robbing, plundering, robbery
مشلح mušallaḥ dressing room (in a public bath)
شلشل šalšala to dribble, trickle
شلفة šilfa (razor) blade
 شلق šalaqa u (šalq) to split lengthwise (ھ s.th.)
شلق bale (e.g., of hay)
 شولقي šaulaqī person with a sweet tooth
شليك look up alphabetically  شولم look up alphabetically  شيلم look up alphabetically شلن (Engl.) šilin pl. -āt shilling
شلو šilw pl. اشالء ašlā’ corpse (esp. one in a state of decay); severed member (of the body); part torn off, fragment; remnant; stump of a limb
شليك (Turk. çilek) šilek (eg.) strawberries
شم šamma (1  pers. perf. šamimtu) a and (1  pers. perf. šamamtu) u (šamm, شميم šamīm) to smell, sniff (ھ s.th.); to snulf (ھ s.th.); to emanate, exude (من from) │ النسيم شم الھواء)) (hawā’a) to get a breath of fresh air, take a walk; -- šamma (1  pers. perf. šamimtu) a (شمم šamam) to behave proudly or haughtily, be proud, haughty, supercilious II to give (ه ھ s.o. s.th.) to smell, 484 let (ه s.o.) smell (ھ s.th.) IV – II V to savor the smell of s.th. (ھ), sniff (ھ s.th.) │ األخبار تشمم to nose about for news VIII to smell, sniff (ھ s.th.); to gather, understand (ھ من s.th. from), read (ه من s.th. into)
شم šamm smelling; sense of smell, olfaction │ النسيم شم Egyptian popular holiday on the Monday following the Greek Coptic Easter at the end of March, in April or in early May
شمة šamma pinch (of snuff); smell, odor; slight trace of s.th., whiff
شمي šammī olfactory
شمم šamam pride, haughtiness, superciliousness
شمام šammām pl. -ūn (tobacco) snuffer
شمام šammām (coll.; n. un. ة) musk- melon, cantaloupe
اشم ašamm  , f. شماء šammā’ , pl. شم šumm having a sensitive, or good, nose; supercilious, haughty; proud (in a complimentary sense); highborn; most honorable
 اإلشمام al-išmām the pronunciation of u with a trace of i, as rüdda for rudda, and vice versa, qǖla for qīla (gram.)
شامة šāmma sense of smell, olfaction
مشموم mašmūm musk
شمأز) اشمأز) išma’azza = to contract, get contracted, shrink; to shrink back, recoil ( من from), shudder (من at), abhor, detest (من s.th.), feel disgust (من for), be nauseated ( من by)
اشمئزاز išmi’zāz shudder; disgust, aversion, repugnance
مشمئز mušma’izz disgusted, nauseated, revolted (من by)
شمبانيا (Fr.) šambanyā champagne
شمت šamita a (شمات šamāt, شماتة šamāta) to rejoice at the misfortune of s.o. (ب), gloat over s.o.’s (ب) mishaps, savor s.o.’s (ب) bad luck II to disappoint (ه s.o.) IV to cause s.o. (ه) to take malicious pleasure in the mishaps of another (ب)
شمات šamāt malicious joy,
Schadenfreude
شماتة šaamāta malicious joy,
Schadenfreude, malice
شامت šāmit pl. شمات šummāt, pl. f. شوامت šawāmit  enjoying another’s misfortune, malicious, gloating
شمخ šamaka a (samk, شموخ šumūk) to be high, tall, lofty, tower up, loom (mountain, building); to disdain (على s.th.), turn up one’s nose (على at s.th.) │ انفه) بأنفه شمخ) (bi-anfihī, anfahū) to be arrogant, haughty, proud, supercilious VI to be high, tall, lofty, tower up, loom; to be boastful, put on airs; to be proud, haughty, supercilious
تشامخ tašāmuk pride, haughtiness, arrogance
شامخ šāmik pl. شمخ šummak, شوامخ šawāmik  high, tall, lofty, towering; proud, haughty, supercilious │ األنف شامخ š. al-anf proud, haughty, supercilious, arrogant
متشامخ mutašāmik high, tall, lofty, towering; proud, haughty, supercilious; towering in lofty heights
مشمخر mušmakirr lofty, towering (of buildings)
شمر II to gather up, lift, roll up, tuck up, turn up (ھ a garment); to prepare, get ready │ لألمر شمر to embark upon s.th., buckle down to s.th.; ساعده عن شمر to bare the upper arm (by rolling up the sleeve), get to work; الجد يد عن شمر (s. al-jidd) to buckle dawn to a job, rally all one’s forces, put one’s shoulder to the wheel V to set to work briskly 485
شمر šamar fennel (bot.) شمرة šumra, šamra fennel شمار šamār fennel
مشمر mušammir busily at work in (an activity)
شمروخ šumrūk pl. شماريخ šamārīk  stalk with date cluster; date-palm panicle, branch stripped of its leaves; little stick; detonator, primer cap
شمأز see اشمأز
شمس šamasa u (شموس šumūs, شماس šimās) to be headstrong, balky, restive (of a horse);
-- šamasa i u and šamisa a (šamas) to be sunny (day) II to expose (ھ s.th.) to the sun, lay ( ھs.th.) out in the sun to dry; to perform the office of deacon (Chr.) IV to be sunny (day) V to bask, sun o.s., lie or sit in the sun
شمس šams f., pl. شموس šumūs sun │ الشمس سمت samt aš-š. ecliptic (astron.); الشمس شروق sunrise; الشمس ضربة ḍarbat aš- š. sunstroke, heat prostration; الشمس عباد ‘abbād aš-š. sunflower; الشمس غروب sunset
شمسي šamsī sun- (in compounds), solar
│ الشمسية الحروف (gram.) the sun letters (which assimilate the l of the article); شمسية صورة (ṣūra) photograph, photo; الشمسي التصوير phtoography
شمسية šamsīya pl. -āt (colloq. شماسي šamāsī) sunshade, parasol; umbrella; curtain, screen; stop (of a wind instrument) │ الشباك شمسية š. aš-ubbāk window curtain, drape; O الطيار شمسية š. aṭ- ṭayyār parachute
شموس šamūs pl. شمس šumus headstrong, balky, restive (horse)
 شماس šammās pl. شممسة šamāmisa deacon of the lower rank of the ministry, nowadays, with unconsecrated persons frequently performing this office, corresponding to the sexton or sacristan (Chr.); acolyte and liturgical cantor of Oriental Christian rites (clerics and laymen)
شامس šamis sunny (day)
مشمس mušmis sunny (day)
شمشم šamšama to sniff (ھ s.th.)
شمط šamiṭa a (šamaṭ) to become gray, haired, turn gray
شمط pl.  , šamṭā’ شمطاء f. ašmaṭ , اشمط
šumṭ, شمطان gray-haired
شمع II to rub, or smear, with wax, to wax (ھ s.th.) │ الفتلة شمع (fatla) to slip away, abscond, make off, decamp
شمع šam‘, šama‘ (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. شموع šumū‘ wax; (wax) candles │ األحمر الشمع sealing wax; الختم شمع š. al-katm do.; شمع األرضية لتلميع (li-talmī‘ al-araḍīya) floor wax
شمعة šam‘a, šama‘a (n. un.) (wax) candle │ O الشرارة شمعة š. aš-šarāra spark plug
شمعي šam‘ī, šama‘ī waxy, waxen, ceraceous, cero- (in compounds), made of wax
شماع šammā‘ chandler, maker or seller of candles
شماعة šammā‘a clothes rack, clothes peg, hat rack
مشمع mušamma‘ waterproof, impermeable (of a garment); -- (pl. -āt) waterproof material; impregnated linen; waterproof cover or coating; oilcloth, wax cloth; linoleum │ للسقف بتيومين مشمع (li-s- saqf) bituminous roof covering, roofing felt, tar paper; مشمع معطف (mi‘ṭaf) raincoat
شمعدان šam‘addān pl. -āt, شماعد šamā‘id ,
شماعدين candlestick, candelabrum
يشمق look up alphabetically 486
  شمل šamila a (šamal) and šamala u (šaml, شمول šumūl) to contain, comprise, comprehend, enclose (ھ s.th.); to imply, implicate, include (ھ s.th.); to touch,
affect, fill, overcome, pervade (ه ھ، s.o., s.th., of feelings, emotions); to prevail, be general, universal │ بعنايته شمله
(bi-‘ināyatihī) to bestow one’s care on s.o., take s.o. under one’s wing V تشمل بالشملة to wrap o.s. in the šamla (q.v.) VIII
= V; to wrap o.s. (ب ھ، in s.th.); to contain, comprise, comprehend, enclose, enfold, imply, implicate, include (على s.th.) │ السواد اشتمله (sawādu) it was completely black
شمل šaml uniting, gathering, concentration; unity. union │ الشمل جمع jam‘ aš-š. reunion, reunification; اجتماع الشمل reunion; unity, union; شمله مزق mazzaqa šamlahū to break up, dismember, dismantle, parcel s.th.; to partition s.th., divide s.th. up
شملة šamla pl. šamalāt cloak; turban │ شملة ام ummu šamlata the world, the temporal joys
شمائل šamā’il  (pl.) good qualities; character, nature
اشمل ašmal more comprehensive; more general, more universal
شامل šāmil comprehensive, exhaustive; general, universal, complete, total
مشمول mašmūl contained, comprised, included, implied │ برعايته مشمول (bi- ri‘āyatihī) enjoying the protection or patronage of s.o.; الوظيفة مشموالت the inherent functions of an office
مشتمل muštamal comprising, containing, including (على s.th.)
مشتمل muštamal cottage (for rent)
مشتمالت muštamalāt contents
 شمال šamāl, šimāl north; north wind; šimāl left hand; left side; left; الشمال the left (pol.); شمال šimāla north of …; شماال šimālan to the left; northward, to the north
شمال غربي northeast; (šarqī) شمال شرقي │ aš- kaukab كوكب الشمال northwest; (garbī) hand left the (yad) اليد الشمال star; polar š.
شمالي šamalī, šimālī northern, northerly, north; situated on the left; الشماليون the leftist parties (pol.) │ الشمالي الشفق (šafaq) aurora borealis, northern lights
   شملولšumlūl pl. شماليل šamālīl  small amount, small quantity; -- (eg.) šamlūl brisk, vivid, agile, lively, nimble
alphabetically up look مشملة، مشمال 
شمندر šamandar white beet, chard
buoy šamandūra شمندورة
 شن šanna u (šann): غارة شن (gāratan) to make a raid, an invasion; to make an attack, launch an attack (على against, on) IV = I
شن šann pl. شنون šunūn (water)skin
مشنة mišanna basket without handles
اشنان look up alphabetically
شنأ šana’a a (شنآن šan’ān, šana’ān) to hate
شنب šanab pl. اشنب ašnāb mustache
شنتيان šintiyān pl. شناتين šanātīn  loose trousers resembling pantalets, worn by women
شنج šanija a (šanaj) to contract, shrink; to suffer from convulsions V = I; to twitch
تشنج tašannuj contraction, shriveling, shrinking (of the skin); convulsive contraction (of a muscle), twitch, jerk, convulsion, spasm, fit, cramp │ التشنج الرعشي (ra‘šī) clonic spasm; الكزازي التشنج (kuzāzī) tonic spasm
تشنجي tašannujī spastic, spasmodic, cramplike, paroxysmal, convulsive 487
شنخوبة šunkūba pl. شناخيب šanākīb  large rock, boulder
شنر II to blame, censure, revile, slander, abuse (على s.o.)
شنار šanār disgrace, ignominy
šarāniq  شرانق = šanāriq  شنارق
شنشنة šanšana rustling (of paper); cracking, crackling
شنشنة šinšina pl. شناشن šanāšin  nature, disposition; habit, custom, practice
  شنيطة šunaiṭa knot; noose, loop
  شنطة šanṭa pl. شنط šunaṭ suitcase; satchel; bag, traveling bag │ اليد شنطة š. al-yad handbag
شنع šanu‘a u (šana‘, شناعة šana‘a) to be ugly, abominable, repugnant, repulsive, atrocious, hideous, horrid, horrible, disgraceful; -- šana‘a a (šan‘) to dishonor,
disgrace (ب or ه s.o.) II to calumniate, slander, revile, defame (على s.o.); to pillory, expose, condemn, denounce (على s.o., s.th.)
شنع šanī‘ ugly, abominable, repugnant, repulsive, disgusting, atrocious, hideous, horrid, horrible, disgraceful, ignominious
شنعة šun‘a ugliness, hideousness, horridness, repulsiveness
شنيع šanī‘ ugly, abominable, repugnant, repulsive, disgusting, atrocious, hideous, horrid, horrible, disgraceful, ignominious
شناعة šanā‘a ugliness, hideousness, horridness, repulsiveness
اشنع ašna‘ , f. شنعاء šan‘ā’  ugly, abominable, repugnant, repulsive, disgusting, atrocious, hideous, horrid, horrible, disgraceful, ignominious
šanāgīb  شناغيب pl. šungūba شنغوبة
spicate protuberance; thorn, spike
شنف II اآلذان شنف (ādāna) to please the ears, to delight (of a voice)
شنف sanf pl. شنوف šunūf earring
شنق šanaqa u (šanq) to hang (ھ s.th., ه s.o. on the gallows)
شنق šanq hanging
شنق šanaq rope
مشنقة mišnaqa pl. مشانق mašāniq  gallows, gibbet; scaffold, place of execution (by hanging); mašnaqa gallows, gibbet
مشنوق mašnūq hanged
شنقب šunqub bécassine, snipe (zool.)
شنكل šankala (eg.) to trip (ه s.o.) up; to hook up
شنكل šankal pl. شناكل šanākil  clothes peg; hook
شنھق šanhaqa to bray (donkey)
شھب šahab gray color, gray
شھبة šuhba gray color, gray
شھاب šihāb pl. شھب šuhub, شھبان šuhbān flame, blaze, fire; shooting star, luminous meteor; star
شھب pl. šahbā’ , شھباء f. ašhab , اشھب
šuhb gray; الشھباء epithet of Aleppo (Syria)
 شھد šahida a (شھود šuhūd) to witness (ھ s.th.), be witness (ھ of s.th.); to experience personally (ھ s.th.), see with one’s own eyes (ه s.o. in a situation); to be present (ھ at), attend (ھ a celebration); to be present at the public appearance of s.o. (ه); to see (ھ s.th.); -- (شھادة šahāda) to testify, bear witness; to attest, confirm, certify (ب s.th., ان that), testify, give testimony, give evidence (على against s.o., to or about s.th., ل in s.o.’s favor); to sign as a witness, to witness (J. a document); 488 to acknowledge, adjudge (ل ب to s.o., s.th.) │ شھد to swear by God; قانونيا شھد to notarize ill to see (with one’s own eyes), view, inspect, watch, observe, witness (ھ s.th.) IV to call (ه upon s.o.) as a witness ( على for s.th.); pass. ušhida to be martyred, die as a martyr X to call (ه or ب upon s.o.) or cite (ه or ب s.o.) as witness (على against or for, في in); to cite, quote (ب s.th.); to attest (e.g., ببيت كلمة معنى على the meaning of a word by a verse); pass. ustušhida to be martyred, die as a martyr
شھد šahd, šuhd pl. شھاد šihād honey; honeycomb
شھدة šahda carbuncle
شھيد šahīd pl. شھداء šuhadā’  witness; martyr, one killed in battle with the infidels; one killed in action
شھيدة šahīda (woman) martyr
شھادة šahāda pl. -āt testimony, witness, evidence, deposition; statement; certificate, certification, testimonial, affidavit; attestation, attest; credentials, identification; (Muslim) creed (= doftrinal formula); martyrdom, اإلثبات شھادة š. al- itbāt evidence for the prosecution; شھادة والسلوك السير حسن (š. ḥusn as-sair) certificate of good conduct; الطرف خلو شھادة العمل عن š. kulūw aṭ-ṭaraf ‘an il-‘amal certificate of discharge (from a position); الثانوية الدراسة شھادة (tānawīya) secondary school diploma; زور شھادة š. zūr false testimony; شھادة على شھادة indirect testimony (Isl. Law); العالمية شھادة š.
al-‘ālimīya (Eg.) diploma of higher learning (highest diploma awarded by Al Azhar University); عالية شھادة (‘āliya) diploma; النفي شھادة š. an-nafy evidence for the defense; الوالدة شھادة birth certificate
مشھد mašhad pl. مشاھد mašāhid  place of assembly, assembly, meeting; place where a martyr or hero died; religious shrine venerated by the people, esp. the tomb of a saint; funeral cortege; profession; view, aspect, spectacle, sight, scenery; place or object of interest; scene (e.g., of a crime, of nature); act, number (as part of a program, e.g., in vaudeville), scene (in theater, as part of a play); aspect │مشھد غنائي (ginā’ī) song scene, vocal recital; الحياة مشاھد m. al-ḥayāh aspects of life
مشاھدة mušāhada seeing, viewing, witnessing, inspection; (pl. -āt) view, sight, spectacle; apparition, vision
اشھاد išhād pl. -āt written certification
استشھاد istišhād citation. quotation; death of a martyr; death of a hero, heroic death; martyrdom
شاھد šāhid pl. شھود šuhūd, شھد šuhhad present; -- (pl. شھود šuhūd, اشھاد ašhād) witness (على for); notary public; -- pl. شواھد šawāhid ) (piece of) evidence (على for); attestation; quotation serving as textual evidence; testimony; an oblong, upright tombstone │ اإلثبات شاھد š. al-itbāt witness for the prosecution; السمع شاھد š. as-sam‘ earwitness; شاھد s. al-‘ain, شاھد
عيان š. ‘iyān, عياني شاھد (‘iyānī) eyewitness; النفي شاھد š. an-nafy witness for the defense; األشھاد رؤوس على in public, for everyone to see
شاھدة šāhida pl. شواھد šawāhid  an oblong, upright tombstone; index finger; true copy, copy of a letter, duplicate; الشاھدة the Earth
مشھود mašhūd taking place in the presence of spectators or witnesses; happening before a large audience, well- attended; memorable (day, event) │ بالجرم المشھود (jurm) in the act, red-handed, flagrante delicto │ المشھود اليوم (yaum) the Day of Resurrection; red-letter day, festive public holiday 489
مشاھد mušāhid pl. -ūn spectator, onlooker, observer
مشاھد mušāhad visible, perceptible; pl.
مشاھدات things seen, sights; visible things
 شھر šahara a (šahr) to make well-known, famous, renowned, notorious (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to spread, make known, divulge, proclaim, announce (ھ s.th.); to draw, unsheathe (ھ a weapon); pass. šuhira to be or become well-known, famed, famous, renowned, notorious (ب by or for s.th. respectively, by or under a name) │ شھر عليه الحرب (ḥarb) to declare war on s.o.; البندقية شھر (bunduqīya) to level a gun (على at s.o.) II to make well-known, famous, renowned, notorious (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to spread, make known, divulge, proclaim, announce (ھ s.th.); to defame, slander, revile publicly, pillory, condemn, denounce (ه s.o.) III to engage or hire (ه s.o.) on a monthly basis, rent (ھ s.th.) by the month IV to make known, proclaim, announce, spread, divulge (ھ s.th.); to unsheathe, draw (ه a weapon); to sell at auction, also المزاد اشھر (mazāda) │ اشھر شيء بيع مزاد (mazāda bai‘i š.) to auction s.th. off, put s.th. up at auction VIII to be or become well-known, famed, famous, renowned, notorious (ب by or for s.th. respectively, by or under a name); to be known (عن of s.o., a trait, and the like); to be widespread, common
شھر šahr pl. اشھر ašhur, شھور šuhūr new moon; month │ العسل شھر š. al-‘asal honeymoon
شھري šahrī monthly, mensal; شھريا šahrīyan monthly, per month, by the month │ شھري اشتراك monthly subscription; monthly fee or contribution; شھري نصف niṣfu šahrīyin fortnightly, semimonthly, appearing biweekly
شھرية šahrīya monthly salary
شھرة šuhra repute, reputation, renown, fame, famousness, celebrity; notoriety; surname (Syr., Leb.) │ عالمية شھرة (‘ālamīya) world-wide renown, worldwide fame
شھير šahīr widely known, well-known, famous, renowned, celebrated (ب by a name); notorious, ill-reputed
اشھر ašhar  better known, more widely known
مشاھرة mušāhara pl. -āt monthly salary; pl. monthly payments, monthly
allowances; mušāharatan monthly, per month, by the month
اشھار išhār announcement, proclamation, declaration; public sales, auction; publicity, advertising │ اشھار اإلفالس i. al-iflās notice of bankruptcy, declaration of insolvency
اشتھار ištihār repute, reputation, renown, fame, famousness, celebrity; notoriety
مشھور mašhūr pl. مشاھير mašāhīr  well- known, widely known, renowned, famous, celebrated; notorious, ill-reputed; wide- spread, common; a famous, celebrated personality, a celebrity; accepted, established, canonical (textual variant, version of the Koran) │ المشھور على according to the general belief, as it is (was) generally understood
مشھر mušahhar well-known, widely known, renowned, famous, celebrated; notorious, ill-reputed
شھق šahaqa a i (شھيق šahīq) to bray (donkey);
-- šahaqa a i and šahiqa a (شھيق šahīq, شھاق šuhāq, تشھاق tašhāq) to inhale; to sigh deeply; to sob, gulp; to moan, groan IV بالبكاء اشھق (bi-l-bukā’) to burst into tears, break out into loud weeping
شھقة šahqa moan(ing), groan(ing); gulping 490
شھيق šahīq braying, brays (of a donkey); sobbing, sobs; sighing, sighs; inhalation, breathing in
شاھق šāhiq pl. شواھق šawāhiq  high, lofty, towering (building, mountain) │ علو شاھق (‘ulūw) tremendous height
شواھق šawāhiq  heights
شھل II to accelerate, speed up, expedite (ھ s.th.); to remove quickly, hurry off (ه s.o.)
شھل šahil nimble, swift, quick
شھلة šuhla bluish-black color of the eyes
اشھل ašhal, f. شھالء šahlā’  having bluish-black eyes
شھم šahm, pl. شھام šihām perspicacious, sagacious, astute, clever, bold, audacious;
 energetic; noble, gallant, decent; gentleman
شھامة šahāma perspicacity, sagacity, astuteness, cleverness; audacity, boldness, gallantry, noble-mindedness; energy, vigor, verve; decency, respectability
شاھين pl. شواھين look up alphabetically
شھو) and شھي) شھا šahā u and شھي šahiya a ( شھوة šahwa) to desire, wish, covet, crave ( ھ s.th.), long (ھ for s.th.) II to make covetous, fill with desire, allure, entice (ه s.o.); to arouse greed, desire, appetite (ه in s.o., ھ for s.th.); to whet the appetite, be appetizing (food) V and VIII to be covetous, greedy, to long (ھ for s.th.), crave, desire, wish (ھ s.th.), ffeel appetite (ھ for s.th.) │ يشتھى ال شيء (yuštahā) an undesirable thing
شھوة šahwa pl. šahawāt greed, craving, desire, ardent wish, longing, yearning, eagerness, passion, carnal appetite, lust; appetite
شھوي šahwī sensual, sensuous, lustful, instinctual, uninhibited
شھوان šahwān, f. شھوى šahwā, pl. شھاوى šahāwā covetous, greedy; lewd, lecherous, lascivious, libidinous, dissolute, debauched
شھواني šahwānī covetous, greedy; lewd, lecherous, lascivious, libidinous, dissolute, debauched; sensual, sensuous, lustful, instinctual, uninhibited
شھي šahīy pleasant, agreeable, desirable; appetizing, inviting, tasty
شھية šahīya appetite │ الشھية فاتح or ما الشھية يفتح (yaftaḥu) stimulating the appetite, appetizing; للطعام الشھية قلة qillat aš-š. li-ṭ-ṭa‘ām want of appetite
تشه tašahhin greed, avidity, cupidity, craving, desire
اشتھاء ištihā’ greed, craving, desire, dent wish, longing, yearning. eagerness, passion, carnal appetite, lust; appetite
مشه mušahhin stimulating the appetite, appetizing; مشھيات appetizers, relishes, hors d’oeuvres
مشته muštahin covetous, greedy, avid, craving, desirous, lustful
مشتھى muštahan desirable; desired, welcome, agreeable, pleasant; (pl. مشتھيات muštahayāt) that which is coveted, object of desire
شياه šiwāh, شواه pl. šāh) شاة un. n. (coll.; šā’ شاء
šiyāh sheep; ewe
شوال šuwāl, šiwāl pl. -āt (large) sack
 شوب) شاب) šāba u (šaub, شياب šiyāb) to mix, blend (ب ھ s.th. with); to adulterate, vitiate, contaminate, spoil, corrupt, pollute, tarnish, sully, stain, spot (ھ s.th.); to mix, blend, intermix (ھ with) │تشوبه ال شائبة blameless, flawless, unblemished, immaculate
شوب šaub mixture; tarnishing, sullying, roiling, rendering turbid; impairment, blemish, flaw; hot wind 491
شائبة šā’iba pl. شوائب šawā’ib dirt, stains, spot, flaw, blemish, defect, fault; suspicion, reason for suspicion, suspicious fact
مشوب mašūb mixed; adulterated, vitiated│ بالھموم مشوب troubled with worries
  شابة look up alphabetically
شوبق šaubaq pl. شوابق šawābiq  rolling pin شوبك šaubak: pl. شوابك šawābik  rolling pin  شوح II (eg.) to grill, broil, roast (ھ s.th.)  شوح šūḥ (coll.; n. un. ة) fir, sapin
 شوحة šūḥa kite (zool.)
شح see مشاحة 
شور II to make a sign, beckon, signal, wink, blink (الى to s.o.); to point out (الى s.th.), point (الى at) III to ask s.o.’s (ه) advice, seek s.o.’s (ه) advice, consult (ه s.o.); to consult, take counsel (ه with s.o.),
نفسه شاور (nafsahū) to take counsel with o.s., reflect, bethink o.s. IV to make a sign, beckon, signal, wink, blink (ل or الى to s.o.), motion (ل or الى s.o., ب to do s.th.); to ask, invite, urge (الى s.o.); to point, allude (الى to), hint (الى at), indicate, point out (على or الى s.th.), call s.o.’s (ل) attention to (على); to advice (على ب s.o. of s.th., ان على s.o. to do s.th.), suggest (على ب to s.o. s.th., ان على to s.o. to do s.th.), command, order ان or ب على s.o. to do
 s.th.); to state, indicate (ب s.th.) │ يشار ما بالبنان اليه (yušāru, banān) that which is pointed at with the finger tips, i.e., s.th. very remarkable, s.th. outstanding; اشار ما بطرف (bi-ṭarfin) he did not bat an eye VI to take counsel, deliberate, consult (مع في with s.o. about) X to ask for advice (ه s.o.), take counsel (ه with s.o.), consult (ه s.o.)
شارة šāra pl. -āt sign, token, distinguishing mark, badge; guile, outward appearance │ الصليب شارة sign of the cross
شورى šūrā consultation, deliberation, taking counsel; counsel; advice │ مجلس الشورى majlis š-šūrā and الدولة شورى مجلس
m. š. d-daula state council
شوري šūrī consultative, advisory
مشوار mišwār pl. مشاوير mašāwīr  errand; O stroke, (of an internal- combustion engine; techn.) │ ثنائي محرك المشوار muḥarrik tunā’ī l-m. two-cycle engine; المشوار رباعي محرك (rubā‘ī l-m.) four-cycle engine
مشورة mašwara, mašūra pl. -āt consultation, deliberation, conference; counsel, advice, suggestion
مشاورة mušāwara pl. -āt consultation, deliberation, conference
اشارة išāra pl. -āt sign, motion, nod, wink, wave; gesture; signal; indication; allusion, hint, intimation; symbolic expression; (silent) reminder; advice, counsel, suggestion; instruction, order, command │ برقية اشارة (barqīya) telegram, wire, dispatch, cable(gram); تلغرافية اشارة telegram, wire; الخطر اشارة i. al-kaṭar air- raid warning, alert; الصليب اشارة sign of the cross (Chr.); الوقت ضبط اشارة i. ḍabt al- waqt (radio) time signal; سلكية ال اشارة (lā- silkīya) radio message; اإلشارات محطة maḥaṭṭat al-i. signal post; اإلشارة اسم ism al-i. demonstrative pronoun; اإلشارة وحدات waḥdat al-i. signal corps units (mil.); رھن اشارته (rahna) at s.o.’s beck and call, at s.o.’s disposal
اشاري išārī (mil.) signalman, member of the signal corps (Eg. 1939)
اشارجي išargī (mil.) signalman, member of the signal corps (Eg.)
تشاور tašāwur joint consultation, deliberation (مع with)
استشارة istišāra pl. -āt a seeking of advice, consultation; guidance, advice (one receives) 492
استشاري istišārī consultative, advisory
مشاور mušāwar adviser, counselor, consultant
مشير mušīr indicative (الى of); adviser, counselor, consultant; field marshal (Eg.; 1933); Fleet Admiral (Eg. 1939)
اليه المشار al-mušār ilaihi the aforementioned, the aforesaid, the said
مستشار mustašār adviser, counselor, consultant, councilor; chancellor; approx.: justice (title; Eg.) │ السفارة مستشار counselor of embassy; المفوضية مستشار m. al-mufawwaḍīya counselor of legation
المستشارية دار dār al-mustašārīya office of the chancellor, chancellery
 شورب šaurab flycatcher (zool.)
 شوربة šōrba (eg.), šōraba (syr.) and شوربا soup
شورت (Engl.) šort short, short feature (motion pictures)
شورمة
اشوس ašwas , f. شوساء šausā’ , pl. شوس šūs, اشاوس ašāwis  proud; bold, audacious, daring, venturesome │ الحرب شوس š. al- ḥarb war heroes
 شوش II to muddle, confuse, confound, jumble (ھ s.th.), disturb (على or ھ s.th.), complicate (ھ s.th.) V to be confused, confounded, muddled, jumbled, deranged, disturbed; to feel indisposed, be ill
شاش šāš muslin; white cloth
شاشة šāša white cloth; الشاشة aš-šāša and البيضاء الشاشة (baiḍā’) (motion picture) screen
شاشية šāšiya, šāšīya pl. شواشي šawāšī a kind of headgear, cap, skullcap
شوش šūš Maria Theresa dollar (Nejd)
شوشة šūša tuft of hair, lock; crest (of birds)
 شواش šawāš confusion, muddle, (state of) disorder, disturbance, derangement (e.g., of the mind)
شواشي šawāšī pl. شواشية šawāšīya a maker of šāšiya’s (see above)
تشويش tašwīš confusion, confounding, muddling; disturbance, derangement; ailment
مشوش mušawwaš muddled, jumbled, befuddled, confused; disturbed, deranged (e.g., of a sensorial function); ailing, ill │ الفكر مشوش m. al-fikr bewildered, confused, baffled
 شاوش pl. شواش look up alphabetically
 شاويش look up alphabetically
شوشبرك šušbarak (eg.) small pastry stuffed with meat and served with milk rice
شوط šauṭ pl. شوط ašwāṭ to a goal; state, phase; round, game, half, course (in sports and games); goal, aim │في (بعيدا) كبيرا شوطا قطع الرقي) التقدم) (taqaddum, ruqiy) and في قطع اشواطا الرقي ميدان (maidān r-ruqīy) to make good progress or headway, advance in great strides, شاسعة اشواطا قطع do.; يفوقه اشواطا (yafūquhū) he surpasses him by far
شواظ šuwāẓ flame; fire, fervor, ardor, passion
 شوف II to polish (ھ s.th.); to adorn, deck out ( ھا a woman) V to look out expectantly, longingly (الى for), look forward (الى to), expect, anticipate (الى s.th.)
شوف šauf harrow
الشوف aš-šūf name of an administrative district of Lebanon
شوفة šaufa (colloq.) sight, spectacle, view
شوفان šūfān oats
شوق) شاق) šāqa u (šauq) to please delight (ه s.o.), give joy (ه to s.o.); to fill (ه s.o.) with longing, craving, desire, 493 arouse longing, craving, desire (ه in s.o.) II to fill (ه s.o.) with longing, craving, desire, arouse longing, craving, desire (ه in s.o.) V and VIII to long, yearn (الى or ھ ه، for), crave, covet, desire ardently (الى or ھ s.th.)
شوق šauq pl. اشواق ašwāq longing, yearning, craving, desire, wish
شيق šayyiq longing, yearning, craving, desirous, covetous; brilliant, gorgeous, splendid
تشويق tašwīq arousing of desire, of longing; fascination, thrilling, awakening of excitement, of eagerness
تشوق tašawwuq longing, yearning, desire, inclination, craving, eagerness
اشتياقištiyāq longing, yearning, desire, inclination, craving, eagerness
شائق šā’iq arousing longing, stimulating desire; brilliant, gorgeous, splendid, beautiful
مشوق mušawwiq arousing desire or longing; thrilling, exciting, fascinating, absorbing, stimulating, stirring, attractive, interesting; -- mušawwaq filled with longing (الى for), desirous, covetous (الى of)
مشتاق muštāq longing, yearning, craving, desirous, covetous
شوك) شاك) (šauk) to sting, prick, hurt, injure, pierce (ه ب s.o. with a thorn, a needle, and the like) II to be thorny; to stud (. s.th.) with thorns or spikes; to sting, prick, hurt, injure, pierce (ه ب s.o. with a thorn, with a needle) IV to sting, prick, hurt, injure
شوك šauk (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. اشواك ašwāk thorns, spikes, pricks, prickles, spines; fishbone; forks │ الشوك على on tenterhooks, on pins and needles
شوكة šauka (n. un.) thorn, spike, prick, prickle, spine, sting, point; tine, prong; spur (of a rooster); fork; fishbone; furor of fighting, bravura, bravery, valor, verve, dash, élan; might, power
شوكي šaukī thorny, spiky, prickly, spiny; spinal │ الشوكي الطين (ṭīn) fruit of the Indian fig (Opuntia ficus-indica Haw.; bot.); الشوكي الحبل (ḥabl) spinal cord; الحمى المخية الشوكية (ḥummā, mukkīya) cerebrospinal meningitis (med.); العمود الشوكي (‘amūd) vertebral column, backbone; spine; الشوكي النخاع (nukā‘) spinal cord
شوك šawik thorny, spiky, prickly, spiny
 شائك šā’ik thorny, spiky, prickly, spiny; delicate, ticklish, critical, difficult │ سلك شائك (silk) pl. شائكة اسالك barbed wire
شوكران šaukarān poison hemlock (Conium maculatum; bot.)
 شول) شال) šāla u (šaul) to rise, be raised, elevated; to raise, lift (ھ or ب s.th.); to carry (ھ or ب s.th.) │ نعامته شالت (na‘āmatuhū) he went away, departed; he died, be is dead II to become sparse, scarce, short in supply III to attack, assail (ه s.o.) IV to raise, lift (ھ s.th.); to carry (ھ s.th.)
شول šawil nimble, adroit, swift, quick, expeditious (at work)
شوال šawwāl pl. -āt شواويل šawāwīl , الشوال Shawwal, name of the tenth month of the Muslim year
مشال mašāl carrying, carriage, conveyance, transportation (of loads); porterage, carrying charges
 شال pl. شيالن look up alphabetically
  شوالlook up alphabetically
شولقى šaulaqī person with a sweet tooth
شولم šaulam darnel (Lolium temulentum; bot.); a variety of vetch 494
شأم see شوام، مشوم pl. شام، شامي 
 شومة šuma stick, cudgel
شون II to garnmer, store (ھ s.th., esp. grain)
شون šūna pl. -āt, شون šuwan (eg.) storehouse, granary, shed, barn
شوندر šawandar white beet, chard
  شوهšawiha a (šawah) and شاه šāha u (شوه šauh) to be or become ugly, misshapen, deformed, defaced, disfigured, distorted, malformed II to disfigure, deform, deface, distort, mar, mutilate (ه s.o., ھ s.th., esp. the face); to revile, slander, defame (ه s.o.); to jam (اذاعة a broadcast) │ وجه شوه الحقيقة (wajah l-ḥ) to distort the truth; شوه وظيفته وجه to disgrace one’s profession V = I
شوه šawāh ugliness, misshapenness, malformation, deformity, disfigurement, distortion, perversion
اشوه ašwah , f. شوھاء šauhā’ , pl. شوه šūh misshapen, malformed, ugly, disfigured, deformed, disfeatured, defaced; distorted, perverted
تشويه tašwīh deformation, disfigurement, defacement, mutilation; defamation; crippledness
تشوه tašawwuh ugliness, misshapenness, malformation, deformity, disfigurement, distortion, perversion
شائه šā’ih misshapen, malformed, ugly, disfigured, deformed, disfeatured, defaced; distorted, perverted
مشوه mušawwah disfigured, defaced, deformed; mutilated, maimed; misshapen, malformed, ugly; distorted, perverted │ الحرب مشوه m. al-ḥarb disabled (inactive service); disabled veteran
 شاه look up alphabetically
شوء see un.) (n. شاة  شوء see شاء of pl. شواه
شوى šawā i (شي šayy) to broil, grill, rout (ھ meat)
شواء šiwā’ broiled, or grilled, meat, and the like │ السجق شواء š. sujuq grilled sausage
شوى šawīy broiled, grilled, rosted شواة šawāh pl. شوى šawan scalp شواية šawāya gridiron, grill
مشواه mišwāh pl. مشاو mašāwin gridiron, grill
شوى seeشى  
وشي see شية، شيات 
شيأ) شاء) šā’a a (مشيئة mašī’a) to want; to wish ( ھ s.th., ان that) │ ﷲ شاء ان (in) God willing; it is to be hoped; I (we) hope so; ﷲ شاء ما whatever (howsoever, how long soever) God intend (used to express an indefinite quantity, amount, number, or period of time); various, sundry, all kinds of, God knows what; also, exclamation of surprise: amazing! that’s right! good! bravo! ﷲ شاء ما الى forever and ever, for all time and time to come; التلفيق له شاء ما لفق (laffaqa, talfīqu) to fabricate the moot outrageous lies
 شيء šai’ pl. اشياء ašyā’  thing; something; (with neg.) nothing │ من شيء
... some
a little, a certain (amount of), a considerable ...; النشاط من شيء (našāṭ) some activity; القلق من شيء (qalaq) some uneasiness, some anxiety; الجھد من شيء بدون (jahd) without any effort at all; شيء ھذا
آخر شيء وذاك (ākar) this and that are two entirely different things (or matters); في شيء األمر there is s.th. wrong, there is a fly in the ointment; الشيء بعض ba‘ḍ š. to a certain extent, a little, somewhat; في ,بشيء شيء in negative sentences: not in any way; in no 495 way, by no means, not at all, not in the least; من كثير شيء على very, extremely, e.g., البساطة من كثير شيء على (basāṭa) very simple; الكثير الشيء the most; ب شيء اشبه (ašbahu šai’in) very much
like ...; شيء بعد شيئا or فشيئا شيئا (fa-šai’an) bit by bit, one after the other, by and by, gradually; شيء ال a nothing, nil, nonentity; nothing (in sport scoring); الالشيء the nothing; شيء ال nothing (as object); ... ال اليسير الشيء غير (gair š-šai’ l-yasīr) only very little; بشيء ليس it is nothing, it is of no consequence; ذلك من شيء في ھذا ليس this has absolutely nothing to do with that
شيئي šai’ī objective, factual
الشيئية lā-šai’īya nonexistence, nothingness, nihility, nullity
شيئ šuyyai’ a little thing, trifle
شوية šuwayya (colloq.) a little, a bit, somewhat
مشيئة mašī’a volition, will; wish, desire
willing God بمشيئة ﷲ│
 شيب) شاب) šāba i (šaib, شيبة šaiba, مشيب mašīb) to become white-haired, gray- haired; to turn white or gray (hair); to grow old, to age; to make white-haired; to bleach (ھ s.th.) II to make (ه s.o.) white- haired, cause s.o.’s (ه) hair to turn white (grief) IV = II
شيب šaib grayness of the hair, gray or white hair; old age
شيبة šaiba a variety of Artemisia (Artemisia arborescens L.; bot.)
اشيب ašyab , f. شيباء šaibā’ , pl. شيب šīb white, gray (hair); white-haired, gray- haired (person); old, aged; old man
مشيب mašīb grayness of the hair, gray or white hair; old age
شائب šā’ib white, gray (hair); white- haired, gray-haired (person); old, aged; old man
  شابة look up alphabetically
شيت šīt pl. شيوتات šuyūtāt chintz. Printed calico (eg.)
  شيح II (tun.) to dry, blot (ھ s.th.) IV to turn away, avert (ب the eyes, one’s face, عن from)
شياح šayyāḥ blotting paper
  شيح šīḥ an oriental variety of wormwood (bot.)
شيخ) شاخ) šāka i (شيخ šayak, شيوخة šuyūka, شيخوخة šaikūka) to age, grow old; to attain a venerable age
شيخ šaik, pl. شيوخ šuyūk, اشياخ ašyāk, مشيخة mašyaka, مشايخ mašāyik , مشائخ mašā’ik  an elderly, venerable gentleman; old man; elder; chief, chieftain, sheik, patriarch, head (of a tribe); title of the ruler of anyone of the sheikdoms along the Persian Gulf; title of native scholars trained in the traditional sciences such as clerical dignitaries, members of a religious order, profesors of spiritual institutions of higher learning, etc.; master; master of an order (Sufism); senator (parl.) │ ارز الشيخ اسمر (aruzz asmar), ابيض ارز الشيخ (abyaḍ) (eg.) popular names for certain rice dishes; البحر شيخ š. al-baḥr sea calf (zool.); البلد شيخ š. al-balad chief of a village, village mayor; السجادة شيخ š. as-sajjāda title of the leaders of certain dervish orders in their capacity of inheritors of the founder’s prayer rug; اإلسالم شيخ š. al-islām sheikh ul-Islam, formerly, esp. in medieval Egypt, title of the Grand Mufti, the spiritual head of Islam, later being bestowed more and more exclusively upon the Mufti of Constantinople in the Ottoman Empire; title of the chief mufti in Tunisia; المدينة شيخ inspector of police (Magr.); األعظم الجامع مشيخة professoriate, or faculty, of the Great Mosque in Tunis;
 الشيوخ (pl. of majesty) title of a ruler 496 among the inhabitants of Nejd; الشيوخ مجلس majlis aš-š. senate
شيخة šaika pl. -āt an old, or elderly, woman, a matron
شياخة šiyāka position, or dignity, of a sheik
شيخوخة šaikūka old age, senility
شيخوخي šaikūkī senile, characteristic of old age
مشيخة mašyaka pl. -āt, مشايخ mašāyik  office, or dignity, of a sheik; sheikdom (in general, specif., anyone of the semi- independent territories on the Persian Gulf); an administrative subdivision (Tun.); professoriate (e.g., of Al Azhar)
شيد) شاد) šāda i (شيد šaid) to erect, set up, construct, build (ھ an edifice, and the like) II = I; IV = I; به or بذكره اشاد (bi-dikrihī) to celebrate, praise, commend s.o. or s.th., speak in glowing terms of s.o. or s.th.
شيد šīd plaster (of a wall); plaster of Paris; mortar
تشييد tašyīd erection, setting up, construction, building (of an edifice)
اشادة išāda praise, commendation, extolment (ب of)
مشيد mušayyad high, lofty, imposing (of a structure)
شيراز šīrāz  Shiraz (city in SW Iran)
شيرج šīraj sesame oil
شيرة šīra a refreshment (made of fruit juice)
شيزوفرانيا šīzofrāniyā schizophrenia
 شيش šīš foil, rapier; jalousie, Venetian blind │ الشيش معلم mu‘allim aš-š. fencing instructor; الشيش لعبة la‘bat aš-š. fencing, swordplay
  شيشةšīša bottle of the narghile; narghile, hookah
شيط) شاط) šāṭa i (شيط šaiṭ) to burn (esp. food) II to burn slightly, singe, scorch, sear (ھ s.th.) IV = II; V = I; X  غضبا استشاط (gaḍaban) to be or become fuming with rage, flare up, fly off the handle
شيطان II tašaiṭana to behave like a devil
شيطان šaiṭān pl. شياطين šayāṭīn  Shaitan,
Satan, devil, fiend
شيطاني šaiṭānī satanic, devilish, fiendish; demonic, demoniac, hellish, infernal
شيطنة šaiṭana devilry, villainy, dirty trick
شيع) شاع) šā‘a i (شيع šai‘, شيوع šuyū‘) to spread, be divulged, become known, become public (news); to spread (out), diffuse (في over); to fill, pervade, dominate (في s.o., s.th.; of a feeling); في شاع to be generally attributable, be generally applicable to s.th.; به شاع to spread, divulge, publicize, circulate s.th.; make s.th. known, bring s.th. to public notice II to see (ه s.o.) off, escort, accompany (ه s.o.); to bid farewell (ه to s.o.); to pay (ه the deceased) the last honors; to send (ه ,ھ s.o., s.th.); to adhere ( ھ to a faction) │ الجنازة شيعت šuyyi‘at il- janāzatu the deceased was escorted to his final resting place, the funeral took place III to follow (ه على s.o. in), adapt o.s. (ه على to s.o. in); to conform, fall in (ه على with
s.o. in); to side (ه ,ھ على with s.o., with s.th. in), take sides (ه ,ھ على for s.o., for s.th. in) IV to spread, divulge, publish, publicize, make known, bring to public notice, circulate (ب or ھ s.th.) V to side (ل في with s.o., with s.th. in), take sides (في ل for s.o., for s.th. in), join (ل s.o., s.th., a faction), make common cause, hold (ل with s.o.); to become a Shiite; to pretend to be a Shiite VI to come to an agreement (على in, about) 497
شيعة šī‘a pl. شيع šiya‘ followers, adherents, disciples, faction, party, sect; الشيعة the faction of Ali, the Shiah, the Shiites (that branch of the Muslims who recognize Ali, the Prophet’s son-in-law, as his rightful successor), pl. اشياع ašyā‘ adherents, followers, partisans
شيعي šī‘ī Shiitic, (pl. -ūn) Shiite
شياع šiyā‘ community (of property) (jur.)
شيوع šuyū‘ publicity, spread, circulation (of news) │ الشيوع على in common, jointly, in joint possession
شيوعي šuyū‘ī communistic, communist; (pl. -ūn) a communist
 شيوعية šuyū‘īya communism
al-janāza ṯ تشييع الجنازة tašyī‘: تشييع
funeral, burial
مشايعة mušāya‘a partisanship, partiality
اشاعة išā‘a spreading, publication, circulation (of news); rumor; news, information
O اشاعية išā‘īya collectivism (pol.)
تشيع tašayyu‘ partisanship, partiality, bias (ل for)
شائع šā’i‘ widespread, (well-)known, public; general, universal; common, joint
│ ان الشائع it is rumored that ...; الذيوع شائع widely known, widespread, common; شائع االستعمال in general use, commonly used, generally accepted; شائع ملك (milk) joint property
شائعة šā’i‘a pl. -āt, شوائع šawā’i‘ rumor مشايع mušāyi‘ partial, adherent, partisan مشاع mušā‘ widespread; (well-)known,
public; general, universal; common, joint; joint (or collective) ownership, joint tenancy (Isl. Law); public property, public domain
متشيع mutašayyi‘ partial; partisan
مشتاع muštā‘ partner, co-partner, co- owner
شاف II to cut up, chop or slice (ھ fruit)
اشياف ašyāf (pl.) cuts, slices
شيون šīfūn chiffon (fabric)
شوق see شيق
 شيك (Fr.) šīk chic
اشيك ašyak  very chic
 شيك (Fr. cheque) šēk, šīk pl. -āt check │ شيك السياحة traveler's check
شيكوريا (It. cicoria) šīkōriyā chicory شيكوالته šīkōlāta (syr.) chocolate  شيل) شال) šāla , to carry, convey,
transport (ھ s.th.); to raise, elevate, lift (ھ s.th.)
شيلة šaila pl. -āt load, burden
شيالة šiyāla carrying, carriage, conveyance, transportation (of loads); porterage, carrying charges
شيال šayyāl pl. -ūn, شيالة šayyāla porter, carrier
شيالة šayyāla suspender
مشال mašāl carrying, carriage, conveyance, transportation (of loads); porterage, carrying charges
 شال pl. شيالن look up alphabetically
شيالم šailām darnel (Lalium temulentum; bot.); a variety of vetch
شيلمان šīlmān (coll.; n. un. ة) steel girders (ir.)
شيلي šīlī Chile
شيم) شام) šāma i to look out (ھ for), be on the lookout, watch; to expect (ھ s.th.), hope (ھ for)
شيمة šīma pl. شيم šiyam nature, temper, disposition, character; habit, custom, practice 498
شامة šāma pl. -āt, شام šām mole, nevus, birthmark
شيمية šīmīya pl. شيامي šayāmī (eg.) vortex, whirlpool, eddy
مشايم mašīm, مشيم pl. mašīma مشيمة
mašāyim  placenta
 شين) شان) šāna i (شين šain) to disfigure, disfeature, mar, .dishonor, disgrace (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) │ سمعته شان (sum‘atahū) to detract from s.o.’s good reputation II = I
شين šain disfigurement, marring, dishonoring, disgracing; disgrace, shame
شائن šā’in dishonorable, scandalous, disgraceful
مشين mušayyin dishonorable, scandalous, disgraceful
 شين šīn name of the letter ش شاي look up alphabetically شياخ pl. of شاء, see شوء

ص
 ص abbreviation of صفحة ṣafḥa page (of a book)
ب ص abbreviation of البريد صندوق ṣundūq al- barīd post-office box, p. o. b.
صؤاب ṣu’āb (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. صئبان ši’bān,
nit ṣībān صيبان صبر  see صابورة صبن see صابون
صاج ṣāj thin sheet iron; bread tin, baking tin │ مضلع صاج (muḍalla‘) corrugated iron
ṣāḥibī yā يا صاحبي = ṣāḥi yā يا صاح
صاد name of the letter ص
صاغ in order, right, proper, sound, regular, standard; a rank in army and police (intermediate between captain and major); a naval rank intermediate between lieutenant and lieutenant commander (Eg.)
│ صاغ عملة (‘umla) standard currency;
صاغ غرش (girš) standard piaster
اغاسي صاغقول (Turk. sağkol ağasι) military rank intermediate between captain and major (Eg.)
صالة (It. sala) ṣāla pl. -āt hall, large room
صالون ṣālūn salon, parlor, reception room │ صالون عربة ‘arabat ṣ. parlor car, club car
ṣamūla صمولة see صامولة
صأى ṣa’ā a i (صئى ṣa’īy) to twitter, chirp (of a bird)
صب ṣabba u (ṣabb) to pour, pour forth, cast, empty, fill (ھ في s.th. into); to impose, عليه بالء (balā’an) a trial upon s.o. │ الغارة صب to commit an assault; -- i (ṣabb) to be poured out, pour forth, shed, flow (في into); to befall (على s.o.), come upon s.o. ( ١) -- ؛(على  pers. perf. ṣabibtu) a (صبابة ṣabāba) to love ardently (الى s.o.) V to pour forth, shed, flow; to drip, outflow (ھ with), be bathed (ھ in); to dissolve, melt, deliquesce │ عرقا تصبب (‘araqan) to be wet with perspiration, break into a sweat VII to be poured out, pour forth, flow, shed, effuse, gush out; to be intent, be bent (على or الى on), be out for (على or الى); to apply o.s. (على or الى to s.th.), study, endeavor (على or الى to be or do s.th.); to be aimed, directed, oriented (على at), bear upon (٩٩٤ (على
صب ṣabb pouring; casting, founding (of metal); cut; flow gush; outpour, effusion; ardently in love, enamored
صبيب ṣabīb pl. اصباب aṣbāb declivity; slope, incline, hillside
صبيب ṣabīb poured out, shed, spilled; blood; sweat, perspiration
صبابة ṣabāba ardent love, fervent longing
صبابة ṣubāba rest, remainder, remnant
مصب maṣabb pl. -āt, مصاب maṣābb  outlet, escape, drain; mouth (of a river, and the like); drainpipe; funnel
مصبوب maṣbūb lead (metal); pl. مصبوبات cast-metal goods, foundry products
 صبأ ṣaba’a a (صبوء ṣubū’) to grow (tooth, nail), sprout (plant); -- ṣaba’a a to turn ( الى to, toward)
 صابئ ṣābi’ Sabian; Mandaean, see the following
الصابئة aṣ-ṣābi’a the Sabians, designation of two different sects, 1) the Mandaeans, a Judeo-Christian Gnostic, baptist sect in Mesopotomia (Christians of St. John), used in this sense in the Koran.
2) The Sabians of Harran, a pagan sect extant as late as the 11  century A. D.
صبح ṣabaḥa a (ṣabḥ) to offer a morning draught (ه to s.o.); -- ṣabuḥa u (صباحة ṣabāḥa) to be beautiful, graceful, handsome, comely, pretty; to beam, be radiant (face) II to offer a morning draught (ه to s.o.); to come in the morning (ه to s.o.); to which a good morning (على or ه to s.o.) III ويماسيه يصابحه he attends to  it mornings and evenings, he is constantly, incessantly occupied with it IV to enter upon morning; to wake up, be awake, be in one’s senses; to be or become clear; to become, be, or happen in the morning; to get (في into a situation), reach a state, come to a point where ...; to become, grow, turn; to be │ الصباح اصبح (ṣabāḥu) it became morning; خير على اصبح to have a good morning, begin the day happily;
at word porting (tuṣbiḥ) تصبح على خير tomorrow well he you may night: (amsā) يفعله اذا اصبح ويفعله اذا امسى morning!
 he does it mornings and evenings, he does it all the time, incessantly; الحق اصبح (ḥaqqu) truth has come to light; يصبح لم يفعل he no longer did (so); وجود له يصبح لم it no longer existed VIII to have a morning draught; to light (ھ s.th., e.g., a lamp); to use for lighting (ب s.th.) X to begin the day
صبح ṣubḥ pl. اصباح aṣbāḥ dawn; daybreak; morning; (ellipt. for الصبح صالة ṣalāt aṣ-ṣ.) morning prayer (at dawn)
صبحة ṣubḥa early morning; breakfast, morning meal
صباح ṣabāḥ morning; صباحا ṣabāḥan in the morning │ مساء صباح ṣabāḥa masā’a in the morning and in the evening, mornings and evenings; اليوم صباح ṣabāḥ al-yaum this morning; صباح ,بالخير صباحك الخير (bi-l-kair) good morning! صباحا عم (‘im) do.
صباحي ṣabāḥī morning (adj.)
صباح ṣubāḥ and صبحان ṣabḥān , f. صبحى ṣabḥā pretty, comely, handsome, beautiful, graceful
صبيح ṣabīḥ pl. صباح ṣibāḥ pretty, comely, handsome, beautiful, graceful
صباحة ṣubāḥa beauty, gracefulness, grace
صبيحة ṣabīḥa morning
صبوح ṣabūḥ morning draught; beautiful as the early day, radiant, bright
مصباح miṣbāḥ pl. مصابيح maṣābīḥ  lamp; light, luminary (also fig.); head-light (of an automobile) │ ٠٠٥ اإلضاءة مصباح incandescent light, light bulb; كشاف مصباح (kaššāf) searchlight; كھربائي مصباح (kahrabā’ī) electric light, light bulb; مصباح يدوي كھربائي (yadawī) electric flashlight
اصباح iṣbāḥ morning
استصباح istiṣbāḥ illumination, lighting │ االستصباح غاز illuminating gas
مصبح muṣbaḥ morning
صبر ṣabara i (ṣabr) to bind, tie, fetter, shackle (ه s.o.); to be patient, be forbearing, have patience, take patience, persevere; to bear calmly, patiently, stoutly, endure (على s.th.); to refrain, abstain, desist (عن from),
renounce (عن s.th.); to hold one’s own (ل against s.o.), withstand (ل s.o.) II to ask (ه s.o.) to be patient; to admonish (ه s.o.) to be patient; to console, comfort, solace (ھ the heart); to make (ھ s.th.) durable; to conserve (ھ s.th.); to preserve, can (ھ s.th.) │ بطنه صبر (baṯnahū; eg.) to have a snack III to vie in patience (ه with s.o.); to bear stoutly V to be patient, be for- bearing, have or take patience, persevere VIII = V
صبر ṣabr fettering, shackling; patience, forbearance; composure, equanimity, steadfastness, firmness; self-control, self- command, self-possession; perseverance, endurance, hardiness │ صبرا قتله qatalahū ṣabran to kill s.o. in captivity; لي صبر ال (ṣabra) I cannot bear it! this is unbearable! الصبر قلة qillat aṣ-ṣ. impatience; الصبر قليل impatient; صبره قل qalla ṣabruhū to be impatient; to lose patience; منزع صبري قوس في يبق لم lam yabqa fī qausi ṣabrī minza‘ (there is no arrow left for the bow of my patience, i.e.) my patience is at an end
صبر ṣabir, ṣabr aloe (bot.)
صبرة ṣabra severe cold
صبرة ṣabra heap, pile; ṣubratan
summarily, on the whole, in the lump
صبار ṣabbār (very) patient, enduring, perseverant, steadfast
صبار ṣubār Indian fig (Opuntia ficus- indica; bot.)
صبر ṣubbair Indian fig (Opuntia ficus- indica; bot.)
صبور ṣabūr pl. صبر ṣubur (very) patient, enduring, perseverant, steadfast
صبارة ṣabāra and ṣabārra severe cold
تصبيرة taṣbira (eg.) light meal in the forenoon, a snack
مصابرة muṣābara long-suffering, longanimity, endurance, perseverance, patience, forbearance
اصطبار iṣtibār patience, forbearance, endurance, perseverance
صابر ṣābir patient, long-suffering, enduring, perseverant, steadfast
 مصبرات muṣabbarāt conserves, canned goods
 صبر ṣabbara to ballast (ه a ship)
صابورة ṣābūra ballast of a ship
صبع ṣaba‘a a (ṣab‘) to point with the finger ( على or ب at); to insert one’s finger (ھا into the hen, so as to ascertain whether she is going to lay an egg)
toe finger; aṣābi‘  اصابع pl. iṣba‘ اصبع linear a al.qadam); i. اصبع القدم (also اصابع من │ cm) 3.125 = (Eg.; measure اصبع األحمر potatoes; fried French البطاطس as-sujuq s. اصابع السجق lipstick; al-a. baṣmat بصمة األصابع frankfurters; له اصبع في ھذا do.; طابع األصابع fingerprint; matter this in hand a has he األمر
صباع ṣubā‘ (eg.) finger; toe (also صباع القدم ṣ. al-qadam)
اصبوع uṣbū‘ pl. اصابيع aṣābī‘ finger; toe
مصبع muṣabba‘ gridiron, grill 501
صبغ ṣabaga u i a (ṣabg, ṣibag) to dye, stain (ھ s.th., e.g., a fabric), color, tint, tinge, paint, daub (ھ s.th.); to give s.th. ( ھ) the air, touch, or appearance (ب of s.th.); to dip, immerse (ھ s.th., في in water); to baptize (ه s.o.) │ صبغة صبغه (ṣibgatan ukrā) to transform, change s.o. VIII to be dyed, be or become colored or tinted; to be baptized, receive baptism
صبغ ṣibg pl. اصباغ aṣbāg color, dye, dyestuff; pigment; (coat of) paint, varnish; make-up, grease paint, face paint
صبغة ṣibga color, dye, dyestuff; pigment; tincture (med.); coloring, tinge, tint, shade, hue, nuance, touch, air; nature, character; (coat of) paint, varnish; baptism; religion │ األفيون صبغة ṣ. al-afyūn tincture of opium, laudanum; اليود صبغة ṣ. al-yūd tincture of iodine; محلية صبغة (maḥallīya) local touch, local color; اخرجه صبغته من (akrajahū) to change, disfigure
s.o. or s.th.
O صبغيات ṣibgīyāt chromosomes
صباغ ṣibāg pl. اصبغة aṣbiga color, dye, dyestuff; spice, condiment, seasoning, sauce
صباغ ṣabbāg dyer
صباغة ṣibāga dyer’s trade, art of dyeing or staining
مصبغة maṣbaga dyehouse, dye works
يوحنا الصابغ │ baptist dyer; ṣābig صابغ
(yūḥannā) John the Baptist
مصبوغ maṣbūg dyed, stained, colored, tinted; having a touch or air (ب of); influenced (ب by); imbued (ب with)
صبن II to soap, rub with soap (ھ s.th.)
صابون ṣabūn soap │ الصابون حجر ḥajar aṣ-ṣ. soapstone, steatite
صابونة ṣābūna (n. un.) a cake of soap
صابوني ṣābūnī soapy, soap-like, saponaceous, made of soap
صبان ṣabbān soap boiler
مصبنة maṣbana soap works
صبو) صبا) ṣabā u (ṣabw, ṣubūw, صبا ṣiban, صباء ṣabā’) to be a child, be childish; -- (ṣubūw, صبوة ṣabwa) to bend, incline (الى to), feel sensual desire (الى for); to strive (الى for), aspire (الى to); -- ṣabiya a (صباء ṣabā’, صبا ṣiban) to behave like a child, act in a childish manner II to rejuvenate, render youthful again V to behave like a child, act in a childish manner; to incline to youthful pleasures; to rejuvenesce, undergo rejuvenation, regain youth, become young again; to woo, court (ھا a woman); to tempt, entice, captivate, charm (ه s.o., ھ the heart) VI to behave like a child X = VI
اصباء ṣabawāt, صبوات pl. ṣaban صبا
aṣbā’ east wind
صبى صبا، ṣiban childhood, boyhood, youth; youthfulness; inclination, propensity, bent, longing, desire
صباء ṣabā’ childhood, boyhood, youth; youthfulness
صبوة ṣabwa youthful passion; amorous disposition; sensual desire; childish manners
صبو ṣubūw youthful passion; amorous disposition; sensual desire; childish manners
صبوة ṣubūwa childhood, boyhood, youth; youthfulness
 صبي ṣabīy pl. صبية ṣibya, ṣabya, صبيان ṣibyān, ṣubyān, اصبية aṣbiya boy, youth, lad
صبية ṣabīya pl. صبايا ṣabāyā girl; young girl 502
صبياني ṣibyānī boyish, childlike; childish, puerile; children’s
صاب ṣābin youthful, juvenile thoughtless, rash
صبو see صبي
صح ṣaḥḥa i (صحة ṣiḥḥa, صحاح ṣaḥāḥ) to be healthy; to be all right, be in order; to recover, recuperate (من from); to heal (of a wound); to be sound, strong, vigorous, firm, right, correct, faultless, unimpaired, unblemished; to be firm, unshakable (resolution); to be admissible, permissible; to be true, authentic, certain, sure; to prove true, turn out to be true; to hold good. go (على for), apply (على to), b. true ( على of); to result or follow definitely (عن from); to be a fact, turn out (ل for); to become a fact; to be successful, work out well (ل for s.o.); to fall to s.o. or to s.o.’s share (على عزيمته صحت │ (ل or عزمه صح (‘azmuhū) he was firmly resolved to ..., his mind was made up to ...; االعتماد يصح عليه it may serve as a basis; فيه يقال ان يصح it is rightly said of him ...; األذھان في صح to appear right, adequate, reasonable II to restore, to health, cure, heal (ه s.o.); to correct, emend, rectify (ھ s.th.); to prepare, a critical edition (ھ of a text); to legalize, authenticate (ھ a document), certify, confirm, attest (ھ the authenticity of a document), sign (ھ a document); to impose one’s signature, undersign (magr.) V to undergo correction, emendation, rectification, be corrected, emended, rectified X to regain health; to recover, recuperate (من from)
صحة ṣiḥḥa health; hygiene; faultlessness, rightness, soundness, correctness; truth, genuineness, verity, veracity, credibility, authenticity; validity; legal validity, legality │ الصحة وزارة العمومية (‘umūmīya) Ministry of Public Health (Eg.)
صحي wholesome, salubrious, healthy, healthful (diet, and the like); sanitary;
hygienic │ الصحي المحجر (maḥjar) quarantine
صحيح pl. صحاح ṣiḥāḥ, ṣiḥāḥ, اصحاء aṣiḥḥā’  healthy, well, sound, healthful; complete, integral, perfect; whole, entire, undivided; right, correct, proper; true, veritable, actual, real; authentic, genuine, truthful, reliable, credible, believable; valid, legally valid, legal, lawful, rightful; strong (gram.; of a consonant, a verb) │ صحيح جمع (jam‘) sound plural (ending in ون -ūn or ات -āt; gram); صحيح عدد (‘adad) whole number, integer (math.); انه ... صحيح (annahū) he was (he is) …, he was (he is), it is true, …
اصح aṣaḥḥ  sounder, healthier; more correct, more proper │ األصح على او or more properly speaking
اصحاح aṣḥāḥ, iṣḥāḥ chapter of the Holy Scriptures (Chr.)
مصح maṣaḥḥ pl. -āt sanatorium; health retreat, sanitarium
مصحة maṣaḥḥa that which promotes or is conducive to health; sanatorium
تصحيح taṣḥīḥ correction, rectification; emendation, critical revision
مصحح muṣaḥḥiḥ O vernier (of a range finder) │ اسفله المصحح (asfalahū) the undersigned
صحب ṣaḥiba a (صحبة ṣuḥba, صحابة ṣaḥāba, ṣiḥāba) to be or become a companion, an associate, a comrade, a friend (ه of s.o.), make or become friends, be friends (ه with s.o.); to associate, have social intercourse (ه with s.o.); to accompany, escort (ه s.o.); to be closely associated (ه with s.o.) III = I; to keep (ه s.o.) company IV to send along, delegate as companion or escort (ه ه or ھ for s.o.
s.o. else or s.th.) VI to 503 have social intercourse, associate (مع with); to become friends, be friends (مع with) VIII to accompany, escort (ه s.o.); to take (ه s.o.) as companion or escort, have o.s. escorted or accompanied (ه by s.o.): to take along (ه s.th., ه a companion) X to take a companion or escort, take along
صحبة ṣuḥba friendship, companionship, comradeship; accompanying, company,
 escort; association, intercourse; friends, companions, associates, comrades; (eg.) nosegay, bunch of flowers: ṣuḥbata accompanied by; with │ ھذا صحبة (ṣuḥbata) herein enclosed
الصحابة aṣ-ṣaḥāba the Companions of the Prophet Mohammed
صحابي ṣaḥābī a Companion of the Prophet Mohammed
مصاحبة muṣāḥaba accompanying, company, escort
اصطحاب iṣṭiḥāb accompanying, company, escort; association
صاحب ṣāḥib pl. اصحاب aṣḥāb, صحب ṣuḥub, صحابة ṣaḥāba, صحبان ṣuḥbān, صحبة associate, companion, comrade, friend; adherent, follower; the other (of two); (with foll. genit.) man, owner, possessor, holder, master, lord, commander, representative, author or originator of …; entrusted with; addicted or given to; صاح يا yā ṣāḥi = صاحبي يا yā ṣāḥibī│ األمر صاحب ṣ. al-amr ruler, master, overlord, sovereign; البواخر صاحب shipowner; الجاللة صاحب ṣ. al- jalāla His Majesty; حال صاحب the noun to which a circumstantial phrase (ḥāl) refers; الدولة صاحب ṣ. ad-daula (formerly) title of the Prime Minister (Eg.); السجادة صاحب ṣ. as-sajjāda title of the leaders of certain dervish orders in their capacity of owners of the founder’s prayer rug; السعادة صاحب ṣ. as-sa‘āda title of a pasha; السماحة صاحب ṣ. as-samāḥa title of a mufti, approx. “His Eminence”; الملكي السمو صاحب ṣ. as-sumūw al-malakī His Royal Highness; الشأن اصحاب
a. aš-ša’n those concerned; the important, influential people; الشبھات اصحاب a. aš- šubuhāt dubious persons, people of ill repute; الطبع صاحب (formerly) Keeper of the Seal (of the Bey of Tunisia); صاحب العزة ṣ. al-‘izza title of a bey; العظمة صاحب ṣ. al-‘aẓama His Majesty; المعالي صاحب ṣ. al-ma‘ālī title of a cabinet minister; صاحب العمل ṣ. al-‘amal employer; الغبطة صاحب ṣ. al-gibṭa title of the Coptic Patriarch; الفضيلة صاحب title of Islamic theologians and sheiks, such as Rector and Professors of Al Azhar University; صاحب ṣ. al-fikra father to the thought, the originator of an idea; الرفيع المقام صاحب (ṣ. al-maqam)
formerly, title bestowed on bearers of the order القالدة established by Fuad I in 1936
صاحبة ṣāḥiba pl. -āt, صواحب ṣawāḥib , صواحبات ṣawāḥibāt fem. of صاحب woman companion. etc. │ الجاللة صاحبة ṣ. al-jalāla Her Majesty; الملكي السمو صاحبة ṣ. as- sumūw al-malakī Her Royal Highness; العصمة صاحبة ṣ. al-‘iṣma title of a lady of high social standing
صويحب ṣuwaiḥib friend (diminutive of
)صاحب
صويحبة ṣuwaiḥiba pl. -āt girl friend (diminutive of صاحبة)
مصحوب maṣḥūb accompanied (ب by); attended (ب with); associated (ب with); provided (ب with)
اصحر aṣḥar  f. صحراء ṣaḥrā’  desertlike; of the color of desert sand; desolate, bleak
صحراء ṣaḥrā’  pl. صحار ṣaḥārin, صحاري ṣaḥārā, صحروات ṣaḥrawāt desert, steppe 504
صحراوي ṣaḥrāwī desert, desolate, waste
areas desert (arāḍin) اراض صحراوية │
صحارة ṣaḥāra pl. صحاحير ṣaḥāḥīr  case, chest, crate, box
صحف II to misplace the diacritical marks; to misread, mispronounce, misspell (ھ a word); to misrepresent, distort, twist (ھ a report, etc.) V to be misread or misspelled (word)
صحفة ṣaḥfa pl. صحاف ṣiḥāf bowl, dish, platter
صحيفة ṣuḥaifa saucer
صحيفة ṣaḥīfa pl. صحف ṣuḥuf, صحائف ṣaḥā’if  leaf (in a book or notebook), page; newspaper, paper, daily, journal; epidermis; surface; exterior │ الصحيفة البيضاء (baiḍā’) honorable name, honor
صحفي ṣuḥufī newspaper-, news-, press- (in compounds), journalistic; (pl. -ūn) newspaperman, journalist │ صحفي مؤتمر (mu’tamar) press conference
صحافة ṣiḥāfa journalism, news business; the press
صحافي ṣaḥāfī journalistic; journalist, newspaperman, newsman
 صحافية ṣiḥāfīya woman journalist
مصحف maṣḥaf, muṣḥaf pl. مصاحف maṣāḥif  volume; book; copy of the Koran (شريف مصحف)
تصحيف taṣhīf misplacement of the diacritical marks; misspelling, slip of the pen; (grammatical) mistake; misrepresentation, distortion
صحل ṣaḥal raucous voice
 صحن ṣaḥn pl. صحون ṣuḥūn bowl, dish; plate; dish, meal, food; yard, courtyard; surface, plane; disk; (pl. اصحنة aṣḥina) phonograph record, disc (tun.) │ الدار صحن courtyard, patio; السجار صحن ashtray; الخد صحن على (ṣ. il-kadd) on the (surface of the) cheek
مصحون maṣḥūn ground, brayed, pounded, crushed, grated
 صحناة ṣaḥnāh sardine
(صحو and صحا (صحي ṣaḥā u (ṣaḥw) and صحي ṣaḥiya a (صحا ṣaḥan) to be or become clear, bright, cloudless, serene (day, sky);
-- (صحو ṣaḥw, ṣuḥuw) to regain consciousness, come to; to recover (من from intoxication), sober up; to wake up, awake (من from sleep); to become alert ( الى to s.th.), become aware (الى of s.th.) II to wake up, awaken, rouse (ه s.o.) IV to be or become clear, bright, cloudless, serene (day, sky); to wake up, awaken, rouse (ه s.o.)
صحو ṣaḥw cloudlessness, brightness serenity (of the weather); clarity, alertness of the mind, consciousness; bright, serene, cloudless, sunny (weather)
صحوة ṣaḥwa awakening, recovery of consciousness; state of consciousness
صاح ṣāḥin bright, serene, cloudless, clear (weather); -- (pl. -ūn, صحاة ṣuḥāh) awake, wakeful, watchful, alert, vigilant; conscious; sober
صخب ṣakiba a (ṣakab) to shout, cry, yell, clamor, roar, bellow; to scold (على s.o., s.th.); to rage, roar, be loud VIII to raise a din, roar simultaneously, be tumultuous, resound in utter confusion, rage
صخب ṣakab shouting, roar(ing), bellowing, yelling, clamor, din, hubbub; cry, outcry, yell; raging
صخب ṣakib crying, yelling, noisy, clamoring, vociferous, roaring, raging
صخاب ṣakkāb clamorous, boisterous, roaring, bellowing, raging
اصطخاب iṣtikāb noise, din, clamor, hubbub, uproar, tumult, turmoil, roar, raging
صاخب ṣākib loud, noisy, clamorous, boisterous, vociferous, tumultuous, roaring, 505 raging │صاخبة قوة (qūwa) power of the voice
مصطخب muṣṭakab noise, din, hubbub, tumult, raging, roar(ing)
صخر ṣakr (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. صخور ṣukūr, صخورة ṣukūra, صخرات ṣakarāt rocks, solid rock, boulders, rock formations; pl. صخور rock (geol.)
صخرة ṣakra boulder, rock │ الصخرة قبة qubbat aṣ-ṣ. the Dome of the Rock, the Mosque of Omar (in Jerusalem)
صخري ṣakrī rocky, stony
صخر ṣakir rocky, stony
صد ṣadda u (ṣadd) to turn away, alienate, discourage, divert, deter, restrain, reject, send away (ه عن s.o. from); to dissuade ( ه عن s.o. from his desire); to repel, parry, ward off (ھ s.th., e.g., an attack); to hinder, prevent (ه عن s.o. from); to
impede, hamper, stop, bring to a standstill (ه s.o.); to resist, oppose (ه s.o.) │ يصد ال النظر (naẓara) it does not offend the eye, it is nice to look at; -- i u (ṣadd, صدود ṣudūd) to turn away (عن from), turn one’s back ( عن on s.o., on s.th.); to stay away, remain aloof (عن from s.th.) II to suppurate, maturate, fester IV do. V to face, confront (ل s.o.)
صد ṣadd averting, turning away; checking, stopping; repulsion, rejection; hindering, impeding, obstruction, prevention; resistance, aversion, reluctance
صدد ṣadad nearness, proximity; intention, purpose, design, aim; respect, regard, relation, concern, subject, matter; topic (of a discussion); ṣadada (prep.) opposite, in front of │ صدد على and بصدد opposite, in front of; صدد في concerning, regarding, re, with respect to; الصدد ھذا في
 in this respect, with regard to this, with relation to this, on this occasion, in this connection; امر بصدد ھو he is currently busy with s.th., he is at present occupied with a matter; بصدده نحن ما الى نرجع (narji‘) we return to what is our present concern or to what we are just discussing
صديد ṣadīd pus, matter
صديدي ṣadīdī suppurative, purulent, festering
صدئ ṣadi’a a (صدأ ṣada’) and صدؤ ṣadu’a u (ṣadā’a) to become or be rusty, rust, oxidize II = I; to make (ھ s.th.) rusty, cause (ھ s.th.) to rust, corrode (ھ s.th.)
صدأ ṣada’a rust; oxidation; smut, rust (plant disease)
صداءة ṣadā’a rustiness
صدئ ṣadi’a rusty, rust-covered; dirty, mean, shabby
مصدأ maṣda’ rusty, rust-covered
صدح ṣadaḥa a (ṣadḥ, صداح ṣudāḥ) to chant, sing; to play (ب a song, a tune)
صدح ṣadaḥ banner
صدحات ṣadaḥāt (musical) strains
O صادح ṣādiḥ note raised a semitone, a sharp (mus.)
صدر ṣadara a i (صدور ṣudūr) to go out, step out (عن or من of, from within); to proceed, emanate, arise, originate, stem ( عن or من from), have its origin (عن or من in); to come out, be issued, be promulgated (order, ordinance, law); to appear, be published (book); to leave, go out (mail); to go (الى to); to happen, occur, come to pass; pass. ṣudira to have a chest complaint │ الجد عن صدر (jidd) to set about seriously, get to work earnestly; عن صدر ارادته to act on one’s own volition II to send, send off, dispatch, forward (ھ s.th.); to export (ھ s.th.); to publish, bring out (ھ a book); to preface (ھ a book); to introduce, commence (ھ ب a book with) 506 III to seize, impound, confiscate (ھ s.th.); to urge, press, oppress (s.o.), throw obstacles in s.o.’s (ه) way IV to send, send out, dispatch (ھ s.th.); to export (ھ s.th.); to issue (ھ s.th., e.g., banknotes, bonds), make out (ھ s.th., e.g., a passport); to
publish, bring out (ھ s.th., e.g., a book); to give, issue (ھ an order); to pronounce, pass (ھ a legal sentence); to utter, express (ھ an opinion, a view) V to be sent, be dispatched; to preside (ھ over), head (ھ a group); to have a front seat (ھ at a social gathering); to resist, oppose (ل s.o.), throw obstacles in s.o.’s (ل) way, stand in s.o.’s ( ل) way X to bring about, obtain (ھ s.th., esp. حكما ḥukman a legal judgment or sentence); to issue (marsūman an ordinance)
صدر ṣadr pl. صدور ṣudūr chest, breast, bust; bosom, heart; front part, front; part, portion; first hemistich; leader, commander; beginning, start, outset, commencement, inception; early period, beginnings, dawn (fig.) │ الدار صدر one who occupies the highest position in the house, who plays first fiddle in the house; رحب صدر (raḥb) generosity, magnanimity; open-mindedness, broadmindedness, liberality, frankness, candor; اإلسالم صدر early period of Islam, early Islam; الصدر األعظم title of the Grand Vizier in the Ottoman Empire; grand vizier (Mor.); صدر المكان ṣ. al-makān the foremost part of a room; النھار صدر ṣ. an-nahār daybreak, beginning of the
day; صدر ابو robin (zool.); الصدر بنات banāt aṣ-ṣ. worries, anxieties, apprehensions; الصدر باب front door; ذات الصدر chest complaint; bottom of the heart, secret thoughts; الصدر رحب raḥb aṣ-ṣ. generous, magnanimous; open-minded, broad-minded, liberal; free of misgivings, unhesitating; الصدر رحيب do.; الصدر ضيق ḍayyiq aṣ-ṣ. annoyed, angry (ب at); disgruntled, depressed; الصدر منقبض munqabiḍ aṣ-ṣ. dejected, low-spirited, crestfallen; الصدر مكانة makānat aṣ-ṣ. first place, precedence, priority; = الصدر واسع الزمان من صدرا الصدر؛ رحب (zamān) quite a stretch of time, for some time; الصدر في in the foreground; بصدره سخم (sakkama) to irritate s.o., make s.o. angry; صدره انشرح inšaraḥa ṣadruhū to be gladdened, be pleased, be cheered, be happy, rejoice
صدري ṣadrī pectoral, chest (used attributively) │ صدرية نزلة (nazla) bronchitis
 صدرة ṣudra vest, waistcoat; camisole, (under)waist, bodice
صديري ṣudairī and صديرية pl. -āt vest, waistcoat; bodice
صدار ṣidār vest, waistcoat; (under-)waist, bodice
صدارة ṣadāra, ṣidāra precedence; presidency, chairmanship; first place, pre- eminence; grand vizierate, office, chancellery, or position, of the Grand Vizier (Mor.)
صدور ṣudūr coming out, appearance, publication (e.g., of a book), issuance (e.g., of an ordinance)
مصدر maṣdar pl. مصادر maṣādir starting point, point of origin; origin, source (fig.); (gram.) infinitive, verbal noun; absolute or internal object
تصدير taṣdīr sending (off), dispatch, forwarding; exportation, export; preface, foreword (of a book); issuance
مصادرة muṣādara seizure, confiscation
اصدار iṣdār exportation, export; issue, issuance, bringing out, edition, publication; making out, issuance │ االصدار مصرف maṣrif al-i. bank of issue
استصدار istiṣdār issue, making out; issuance 507
صادر ṣādir going out, emanating, originating; issued, come out, published, etc.; exportation, export; yield; الصادرات export goods, exports
مصدور maṣdūr affected with a pectoral ailment, phthisical, consumptive, tubercular
مصدر maṣdar export merchant, exporter
صدع ṣada‘a a (ṣad‘) to split, cleave, part, sunder (ھ s.th.); to crack, break (ھ an object), cause (ھ an object) to crack; to break (ھ through obstacles), conquer, overcome, surmount (ھ obstacles, difficulties) │ بالحق صدع (ḥaqq) to come out openly with the truth; بأمر صدع (amr) to execute an order, comply with an order; pass. sudi‘a to have or get a headache II to cause a headache (ه to s.o.); to molest, harass, trouble (خاطره kāṭirahū s.o.); pas. ṣuddi‘a to have or get a headache V to get
split, let cleft, come apart, burst, break, crack; to go to pieces; to reel, waver, be shaken; to separate (عن from), part (عن with) VII to get split, get cleft, come apart, break, crack; to be rudely interrupted; to break, dawn (morning)
صدع ṣad‘ pl. صدوع ṣudū‘ crevice, fissure, crack, break, rift, cleft
صداع ṣudā‘ headache
مصدوع maṣdū‘ having a crack, cracked, broken
صدغ ṣudg pl. اصداغ aṣdāg temple (anat.); earlock, lovelock (also الصدغ قصة quṣṣat aṣ-ṣ.)
صدغي ṣudgī temporal (anat.)
صدف ṣadafa i u (ṣadf, صدوف ṣudūf) to turn away (عن from), avoid, shun (عن s.o., s.th.); -- i (ṣadf) to turn (ه s.o.) away (عن from), discourage, restrain, deter (ه عن s.o. from); to happen by chance III to find (ھ، ه s.o., s.th.), meet (ه s.o., ھ with s.th.); to meet unexpectedly, by chance (ه s.o.), light (ه ھ، on), come across s.o. or s.th. (ھ، ه), run into s.o. or s.th. (ه ھ،), encounter ( ھ, s.o., s.th.); to coincide, be coincident, concur (ھ with s.th.); to fall (ھ on a given date); to happen by chance, come to pass ( ان that) │ االستحسان صادف to meet with approval; محله صادف (maḥallahū) to come in handily, be convenient, be opportune V to turn away (عن from), avoid, shun (عن s.o., s.th.) VI to happen by chance, come to pass
صدف ṣadaf (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. اصداف aṣdāf pearl oyster, sea shell, conch │ صدفة االذن ṣ. al-udun external ear, auricle, pinna
صدف ṣadaf, الصدفية مرض maraḍ aṣ- ṣadafīya a noncontagious skin disease, psoriasis (med.)
صدفي ṣadafī sea-shell, shell (adj.); nacreous, mother-of-pearl (adj.)
صدفة ṣudfa pl. صدف ṣudaf chance, haphazard, coincidence, unexpected concurrence; صدفة ṣudfatan by chance, by coincidence, accidentally │ بالصدفة or الصدفة بطريق by chance, by coincidence, accidentally; as chance will have it, haphazardly
 مصادفة muṣādafa pl. -āt encounter, meeting; chance, haphazard, coincidence, unexpected concurrence; muṣādafatan by chance, by coincidence, accidentally
مصادف muṣādif corresponding (ل to), concurrent (ل with a date of another chronological system), coincident (ل with), falling (ل on a given date)
صدق ṣadaqa u (ṣadq, ṣidq) to speak the truth, be sincere; to tell (ه s.o.) the truth (عن about); to prove to be true, turn out to be correct, come true; to be right; to fit exactly (على s.o. or s.th.), apply (على to), hold true (على of) │508 وعده or وعده في (fī wa‘dihī or wa‘dahū) to keep, or fulfill, one’s promise; النصيحة صدقه (naṣīḥata) to advice s.o. sincerely; الحب صدقه (ḥubba) to love s.o. sincerely, truly II to deem (ه ھ،
s.o. s.th.) credible, accept (ھ s.th.) as true, give credence (ه ھ، to s.o., to s.th.), believe, trust (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to consider or pronounce (ھ s.th.) to be true, right, correct or credible; to believe (ب in); to give one’s consent, to consent, assent, agree (على to s.th.), approve (على of s.th.), grant, license, sanction, certify, confirm, substantiate, attest, ratify, authenticate, legalize, verify (على s.th.) │ يصدق ال (yuṣaddaqu) incredible, unbelievable, unreliable, untrustworthy; كذب او صدق ṣaddiq au kaddib (as an affirmative parenthesis) believe it or not III to treat (ه s.o.) &s a friend; to maintain one’s friendship (ه with s.o.); to be or become friends (ه with s.o.), befriend (ه s.o.); to give one’s consent, to consent, assent, agree (على to s.th.), approve (على of), grant, license, sanction, certify, confirm, substantiate (على s.th.); to legalize, authenticate (على a signature, etc.) IV to fix a (bridal) dower (ھا for a woman) V to give alms (على to s.o.); to give as alms, donate (على to s.o., ب s.th.)
صدق ṣidq truth, trueness, truthfulness; sincerity, candor; veracity, correctness (of an allegation); efficiency; صدقا ṣidqan truly, really, in truth
صدقة ṣadaqa pl. -āt alms, charitable gift; almsgiving, charity, voluntary contribution of alms, freewill offering; legally prescribed alms tax (Isl. Law) │
الفطر صدقة ṣ. al-fiṭr almsgivings at the end of Ramadan (Isl. Law)
صداق ṣadāq, sidāq pl. صدق ṣuduq, اصدقة aṣdiqa (bridal) dower; -- (pl. اصدقة) marriage contrast (tun.)
صداقة ṣadāqa pl. ·41 friendohip
صديق ṣadīq pl. اصدقاء aṣdiqā’ , صدقاء ṣudaqā’ , صدقان ṣudqān friend; friendly, connected by bonds of friendship
صدوق ṣadūq veracious, truthful, honest, sincere
صديق ṣiddīq strictly veracious, honest, righteous, upright; الصديق epithet of the first Caliph, Abū Bakr
اصدق aṣdaq  truer, sincerer │ اصدق على برھان (a. burhānin) the most reliable, or best, proof for ...; صديق اصدق the most loyal, or best, friend
مصداق miṣdāq confirmation, corroboration, substantiation; touchstone, criterion
تصديق taṣdīq belief, faith (ب in); consent, assent, agreement (على to), approval, sanctioning, licensing, certification, confirmation, attestation, ratification, verification, authentication, legalization (على of s.th.) │ التصديق سرعة sur‘at at-t. credulity; التصديق سريع credulous مصادقة muṣādaqa consent, assent, agreement (على to), concurrence ( على in); approval, sanctioning, certification, confirmation, attestation, ratification (على of s.th.); legalization, authentication (على of a document)
تصادق taṣāduq legalization, authentication (على of a document)
صادق ṣādiq true, truthful, veracious, sincere, candid; reliable; accurate, true, genuine, faithful, authentic
مصدقة muṣaddiqa certificate, certification, attestation
مصدق muṣaddaq credible, believable, reliable, trustworthy │ مصدق غير incredible; رسميا عليه مصدق (rasmīyan) legalized, officially certified 509
صيدلي look up alphabetically
 صدم ṣadama i (ṣadm) to bump, strike, knock, dash, bounce, bang, run (ه ھ، against), hit (a upon); to run (ه into s.o., e.g., an automobile, etc.); to collide, clash (ب with, e.g., train with car) ill to bump, strike, knock, dash, bounce, bang, run (ھ، ه againat s.o. or s.th.); to resist, oppose (ھ، ه s.o., s.th.), battle (ه ھ، against); to encounter (hostilely), clash; pass. صودم ṣūdima to be severely afflicted (ب by) VI to collide (e.g., trains), encounter (armies); to clash, conflict (e.g., different opinions) VIII to collide, clash (ب or مع with); to bump, strike, run (ب against), hit (ب s.th., e.g., a mine); to take offense (ب at, e.g., at mistakes), take exception (ب to); to fail (ب due to), be thwarted (ب by);
= VI
صدمة ṣadma pl. ṣadamāt push, thrust, jolt, shook, blow, stroke; upset, commotion, (psychic) shock; obstacle, difficulty
صدام ṣidām collision, clash; breakdown, collapse │ وجداني صدام (wijdānī) mental breakdown
مصادمة muṣādama, pl. -āt collision, clash, impact
تصادم taṣādum collision, clash; bounce, impact (ب on); upset, commotion, (psychic) shock │ التصادم طاسة buffer (railroad)
اصطدام iṣṭidām collision, clash; bounce, impact (ب on); upset, commotion, (psychic) shock
صدى ṣadiya II (ṣadan) to be very thirsty IV to echo, resound, reverberate V to occupy
o.s. (ل or الى with); to turn, apply o.s. (ل or الى to s.th.); to undertake (ل or الى s.th.), embark (ل or الى upon); to oppose, resist, counteract, antagonize (ل s.o.), throw obstacles in s.o.’s (ل) way, be in s.o.’s (ل) way
صدا ,صدى ṣadan pl. اصداء aṣdā’ echo, reverberation
تصدية taṣdiya hand clapping
صر ṣarra i (ṣarr, صرير ṣarīr) to chirp, stridulate (cricket); to creak (door); to squeak, screech; to grate, scratch; to gnash, chatter (teeth); to lace, cord, tie up,
truss up, bind (ھ s.th.); to shove, put (في ھ money into a purse); to prick up (ھ or ب one’s ears) IV to persist (على in), insist ( على on); to make up one’s mind, resolve, determine, decide (على to do s.th.); to prick up (ھ or ب one’s ears)
صرة ṣurra pl. صرر ṣurar (money) bag, purse; bundle, packet, parcel │ الصرة or الحرمين صرة ṣ. al-ḥaramain the ṣurra for Mecca and Medina, the traditional funds sent by the different Islamic countries (nowadays, e.g., by Egypt and Tunisia) with the hadj caravan to be distributed among the poor of Mecca and Medina; الصرة امين the Trustee of the ṣurra (who is responsible for its delivery); النقود صرة cash remittance
صرير ṣarīr chirping, stridulation (of crickets); squeaking, screeching
al-lail ṣ. صرار الليل or ṣarrār صرار
cricket (zool.)
صريرة ṣarīra coins wrapped in a purse
اصرار iṣrār penitence, perseverance ( على in), insistences (على on) │ اإلصرار سبق sabq al-i. premeditation, willfulness (jur.)
مصر muṣirr persistent, insistent; determined, resolute
الصرب aṣ-ṣirb Serbia; the Serbs
صربي ṣirbī Serbian
صرح ṣaruḥa u (صراحة ṣarāḥa, صروحة ṣurūḥa) to be or become pure, unadulterated, uncontaminated, clear; -- ṣaraḥa a (ṣarḥ) to make clear, clarify, explicate, 510 explain (ھ s.th.) II to explain, explicate, clarify, make clear (ھ s.th.); to declare, state, announce (ب s.th.), make a statement (ب about); to speak out frankly, openly, be clear, be explicit (,ب عن about), let (عن ب، s.th.) be known; to allow, permit, grant (ل ب to s.o. s.th.); to license (ب s.th.), give a permit, grant a license (ب for) III to speak frankly, openly; to speak out frankly or openly, be clear, be explicit (ب about), avow (ب s.th.), let (ب s.th.) be known; to declare (ه ان to s.o. that) IV to make clear, clarify, explicate, explain (ھ s.th.) VI to become clear, evident, manifest, come to light VII to become evident, manifest, clear
 صرح ṣarḥ pl. ṣurūḥ castle, palace, lofty edifice, imposing structure
صراح ṣurāḥ pure, unadulterated, uncontaminated, clear; distinct, plain, obvious, evident, patent, manifest, unambiguous, unequivocal
صريح ṣarīḥ pl. صرحاء ṣuraḥā’ , صرائح ṣarā’iḥ  pure, unadulterated, uncontaminated; clear; distinct, plain, obvious, evident, patent, manifest, unambiguous, unequivocal; open, frank, sincere, candid; free, openhearted
صراحة ṣarāḥa clearness clarity, distinctness, plainness; unambiguousness; openness, frankness, candor, sincerity, openheartedness; ṣarāḥatan clearly, plainly, distinctly, patently, unequivocally, unambiguously; openly, frankly, bluntly, straightforward, honestly, openheartedly
اصرح aṣraḥ  purer, clearer; sincerer
تصريح taṣrīḥ pl. -āt, تصاريح taṣārīḥ  (public) statement, declaration; permission, (official) permit, license
صرخ ṣaraka u (صراخ ṣurāk, صريخ ṣarīk) to cry, yell, scream, shriek, shout; to cry for help; to call (ب s.o.); to call out, shout (على to s.o.); to yell, bellow, roar (في or وجھه في at s.o.) │ صرخة صرخ (ṣarkatan) to cry out, let out a cry X to cry for help; to call (ه to s.o.) for help
صرخة ṣarka pl. -āt cry, outcry, yell, scream; call for help
صراخ ṣurāk crying, yelling; clamor, screaming, screams
صريخ ṣarīk crying, yelling; clamor, screaming, screams
صراخ ṣarrāk crier, screamer, bawler; peacock
صاروخ ṣārūk pl. صواريخ ṣawārīk  rocket; siren (magr.) │ O عابر صاروخ القارات intercontinental ballistic missile ICBM
صاروخية قنبلة qunbula ṣārūkīya rocket bomb, guided missile
صارخ ṣārik gaudy, flashy (color); glaring (color, light); crude, gross, coarse; noisy, loud; crier, caller
صرد ṣard severe cold (spell)
صراد ṣarrāad drifting clouds, cirrus
صريد ṣurraid drifting clouds, cirrus
صرصر ṣarṣara to let out a piercing cry, scream shrilly
صرصر ريح rīḥ ṣarṣar violent, cold wind, icy gale
صرصر ṣurṣur pl. صراصير ṣarāṣīr  a variety of cockroach (Blatta aegyptiaca; zool.); cricket (zool.)
ṣarāṣīr  صراصير pl. ṣurṣūr صرصور
cricket (zool.); cockroach (syr.)
صرصار ṣarṣār cricket (zool.)
صراط ṣirāṯ way, path, road
صرع ṣara‘a a (ṣar‘, ṣir‘, مصرع maṣra‘) to throw down, fell, bring to the ground (ه s.o.); -- pass. ṣuri‘a to be epileptic, have an epileptic fit; to be or go mad 511 III to wrestle (also as a sport), fight (ه with s.o.) VI to wrestle with one another VII to be or go mad VIII = VI
صرع ṣar‘ epilepsy
صرع ṣur‘ rein
صريع ṣarī‘ pl. صرعى ṣar‘ā thrown to the ground, felled; epileptic; demented, insane, mad, crazy; (with foll. genit.) succumbing to s.th., fallen victim to s.th.,
│ صريعا سقط to be killed (in battle); صريع الشراب ṣ. aš-šarāb addicted to the bottle; الكرى صريع ṣ. al-karā overcome by sleep
مصرع maṣra‘ pl. مصارع maṣāri‘  battle- ground; ruin, destruction, perdition, death; fatal accident; vital part of the body (the injury of which can cause death)
leaf maṣārī‘  مصاريع pl. miṣrā‘ مصراع door صفائح المصراع │ hemistich door; a of (miṣrā‘aihi) الباب مفتوح على مصراعيه panel; open wide is door the
صراع ṣirā‘ wrestling, wrestling match; fight, struggle
مصارعة muṣāra‘a wrestling, wrestling match; fight, struggle
اصطراع iṣṭirā‘ fight, struggle, conflict, controversy
 مصروع maṣrū‘ thrown to the ground, felled; epileptic; demented, insane, mad, crazy
مصارع muṣāri‘ wrestler; fighter
صرف ṣarafa i (ṣarf) to turn; to turn away, avert (ه ھ، عن s.o., s.th. from); to dissuade, alienate, keep away (ه عن s.o. from); to divert, distract (ه عن s.o. from); to turn, direct (ه الى s.th., e.g., one’s eyes, one’s attention, to s.th.); to grant leave, dismiss, send away (ه s.o.); to give s.o. (ه) the brush-olf; to spend, expend (ه على money for); to defray the cost (على of s.th.), pay ( على for s.th.); to pay out, disburse (ھ ل money to); to issue, give out (ھ s.th., e.g., tickets), make out (ھ s.th., e.g., a permit); to spend, devote (ل or الى or ھ في time, effort on); to pass, spend (ھ في time at s.th., doing s.th.); to change money (ھ); to inflect (ھ a word) │ عن النظر صرف (naẓar) to avert one’s glance from, disregard s.th., pay no attention to s.th., leave s.th. out of consideration; -- i (صريف ṣarīf) to creak, grate II to cause to flow off, draw off (ھ water); to drain (ھ land); to dispatch, expedite, wind up, liquidate (ھ business); to change money (ھ); to market, retail, distribute, sell (ھ merchandise), dispose ( ھ of merchandise); to circulate (ھ s.th.); to give a free hand (في ه to s.o. in s.th.), let (ه s.o.) dispose freely (في over, in), grant the right of disposal (ه في to s.o. over or in s.th.); to inflect (ھ a word), conjugate (ھ a verb), decline (ھ a noun) V to act independently; to dispose freely, have the right of disposal (في over); to move freely, act without restriction (في in), administer (freely) (في s.th.); to behave, act, conduct o.s., comport o.s. ; to exercise sacerdotal functions (Copt.-Chr.); to be inflected (gram.); to be derived │ كيفيا تصرفا تصرف في (taṣarrufan kaifīyan) to proceed arbitrarily in or at VII to turn away; to go away, depart (عن from), leave (عن s.th.); to give up, abandon, relinquish, quit (عن s.o., s.th.); to flow off, drain; to pass on, change over, turn one’s attention (الى to s.th.); to proceed (الى to some activity or to do s.th.); to apply o.s., devote o.s. (الى to s.th.); to be spent, be expended (money); to be issued, be made out (e.g.. ticket); to be fully, i.e., triptotically, inflected │
نفسه الى انصرف to withdraw by o.s., isolate o.s.; يفعل انصرف to set about to do s.th., proceed to do s.th. 512
صرف ṣarf averting, turning away; expenditure, expense; spending, use, application (e.g., of time, of effort, etc.); issuance, issue, making out; disbursement; money changing; barter (Isl. Law); drainage; inflection (gram.); (pl. صروف ṣurūf) adversities, misfortunes (also
الدھر صروف ṣurūf ad-dahr) │ الصرف محطة maḥaṭṭat aṣ-ṣ. (el.) power station; drainage station, pumping
station; الصرف سعر ṣi'r aṣ-ṣ. exchange rate; الصرف علم ‘ilm aṣ-ṣ. morphology (gram.); الصرف من ممنوع indeclinable (gram.); عن النظر بصرف (bi-ṣ. in-naẓar) regardless of, irrespective of, notwithstanding, to say nothing of
صرف ṣirf pure, unadulterated, unmixed; mere, sheer, absolute
صرفيات ṣarfīyāt payments, disbursements
صريف ṣarīf squeak(ing), creak(ing), squeal(ing)
صراف ṣarrāf money changer; cashier, teller, treasurer; paymaster; banker
صرافة ṣarrafa (woman) cashier │ صرافة التذاكير (woman) ticket agent
صيرف ṣairaf pl. صيارف ṣayārif  money changer; cashier, teller, treasurer
صيرفي ṣairafī pl. صيارفة ṣayārifa money changer; cashier, teller, treasurer
صريفة ṣarīfa pl. صرائف ṣarā’if  reedmat hut
مصرف maṣrif pl. مصارف maṣārif  drainage canal, drainage ditch, drain; bank; pay office, teller’s window (at a bank)
تصريف taṣrīf drawing off (of water), drainage; sale, retail, disposal, distribution; change, alteration; inflection, declension, conjugation │ الدھر تصاريف t. ad-dahr the vicissitudes of fate; تصريف الشئون settlement, windup, or management, of affairs
تصرف taṣarruf pl. -āt free disposal (في over), right of disposal; usufruct;
 administration; action, way of acting, demeanor, behavior, conduct; outflow, efflux, effluence, output (in terms of the capacity of a pump), discharge, throughput, quantity of water flowing through; pl. تصرفات measures, dispositions, regulations │ منجز تصرف (munjaz) regulation effective immediately (Isl. Law); التصرف حسن ḥusn at-t. discretion; التصرف مطلق muṭlaq at-t. having unrestricted right of disposal,
invested with full power; بتصرف freely; تصرفه تحت at s.o.’s disposal; تحت شيئا وضع تصرفه to put s.th. at s.o.’s disposition; الزمن تصرفات t. az-zaman the vicissitudes of time
انصراف inṣirāf going away, leave, departure; avertedness, aversion (عن to); abstention (عن from). renunciation (عن of)
مصروف devoted, dedicated (الى to s.th.); money spent, expenditure; pl. -āt, مصاريف maṣārīf  expenses, expenditures, costs │ البريد مصروف and البريد مصاراف postage; الجيب مصروف m. al-jaib pocket money; المصاريف خالص postage free, franked; وفى المصاريف (wafā) to cover the cocte, defray the expense; الخدمة من مصروف (kidma) dismissed, discharged
متصرف mutaṣarrif approx.: provincial governor (Ir.; administering anyone of the 14 liwā’, q.v.); former title of a Turkish administrative officer in Arab countries
متصرف mutaṣarrifa jurisdiction of a mutaṣarrif (q.v.), approx.: province; dignity, government, authority, etc., of a mutaṣarrif
منصرف munṣarif fully inflected, i.e., triptotical (gram.); المنصرف the money spent, expenditures
منصرف munṣarif departure, leave, going away │ عنه منصرف ال (munṣarafa) 513 indispensable, inevitable; منصرفھم munṣarafahum at their departure, when they left; النھار صرف في (m. in-nahār) at the parting of day, at day’s end
  صرمṣaruma u (صرم ṣarāma) to be sharp; to be stern, hard, harsh, severe; -- ṣrama i (ṣarm, ṣurm) to cut, cut off, sever (ھ s.th.); to leave, forsake (ه s.o.), separate (ه from s.o.), part (ه with s.o.) II to cut, cut
off, cut through, sever, separate (ھ s.th.) V to decrease, wane, dwindle; to elapse, go by, pass; to be past, be bygone, be over (time) VII to elapse, go by, pass; to be past. be bygone, be over (time)
صرم ṣarm severance, separation
صرمة ṣirma pl. صرم ṣiram herd of camels
صرامة ṣarāma sharpness, keenness; harshness, sternness, severity, rigor, unfriendliness
صريمة ṣarīma horse bridle
مصارمة muṣārama estrangement, break, antagonism, hostility
صارم ṣārim sharp, harsh, hard, severe, stem
منصرم munṣarim elapsed, past, bygone (period of time)
سرم = ṣurm صرم 
 صرم ṣarma pl. صرم ṣuram (eg.) shoe
صرمايا ṣurmāyā pl. -āt, صرامى ṣarāmī (syr.) shoe made of red or yellow leather; shoes
مصر see مصارين
ṣawārin صوار pl. ṣāriya صارية and ṣārin صار
mast, pole │ العلم صارى ṣ. l-‘alam flagpole
مصطبة maṣṭaba, miṣṭaba pl. مصاطب maṣāṭib  outdoor stone bench (built into the side of a house), maṣṭaba
مصطول maṣṭūl fool
صعب ṣa‘uba u (صعوبة ṣu‘ūba) to be hard, difficult (على for); to be embarrassing, shocking, unpleasant (على for, to) II to make hard, make difficult (على for s.o. s.th.); to present as difficult (على to s.o. s.th.) V to become difficult; to make (ھ s.th.) hard or difficult VI to be difficult (of a person); to be hard to please X to find or consider difficult (ھ s.th.)
صعب ṣa‘b pl. صعاب ṣi‘āb hard, difficult; pl. difficulties │ االحتمال صعب hard to bear, oppressive; االرضاء صعب ṣ. al-irḍā’ hard to please, fastidious; المراس صعب obstinate, stubborn, self-opinionated, recalcitrant, headstrong; صعبة عملة (‘umla) hard currency
 صعوبة ṣu‘ūba difficulty │ المراس صعوبة obstinacy, stubbornness, recalcitrance, refractoriness
مصاعب maṣā‘ib  difficulties
صعتر ṣa‘tar wild thyme (Thymus serpyllum;
bot.)
صعد ṣa‘ida a (صعود ṣu‘ūd) to rise, go up; to lift, climb, ascend, slope upward; to mount, scale, ascend, climb (ھ s.th.), climb up (ھ on s.th.); to take off (airplane); الى به صعد to make s.o. ascend, lead s.o. up to … II to ascend, mount; to go upstream; to travel to Upper Egypt; to send up (ه s.o.); to cause (ھ s.th.) to rise or ascend; to heave
(from one’s breast), utter (ھ sigh, wails, and the like); to cause (s.th.) to evaporate, vaporize, volatilize (ھ s.th.); to sublimate (ھ s.th.; chem.) │ الزفرات صعد (zafarāt) to heave deep sighs IV to make ( ه s.o.) ascend or advance; to ascend (الى to elevated terrain); to go upstream; to travel up, travel V to evaporate, vaporize VI to rise, lift, ascend 514
صعود ṣu‘ūd height, altitude
صعدة ṣa‘da pl. ṣa‘adāt rise, incline; slope, declivity
صعود ṣu‘ūd rising, lifting, ascending; take-off (of an airplane); ascent; boom; advance (الى toward) │ الرب صعود ṣ. ar- rabb and الصعود عيد ‘īd aṣ-ṣ. Ascension Day (Chr.)
صعود ṣa‘ūd steep hill
صعيد ṣa‘īd pl. صعود ṣu‘ūd highland, upland, plateau; الصعيد and مصر صعيد ṣ. miṣr Upper Egypt │ واحد صعيد في on a common basis, on common ground, on equal footing, without distinction, indiscriminately; واحد صعيد على congenial, like-minded, kindred in spirit, agreed
صعيدي ṣa‘īdī pl. صعايدة ṣa‘āyida Upper Egyptian
صعداء ṣu‘adā’  (deep) sigh │ تنفس الصعداء tanaffasa ṣ-ṣu‘adā’ to sigh (deeply), heave a (deep) sigh
مصعد maṣ‘ad pl. مصاعد maṣā‘id  point of ascent
maṣā‘id  مصاعد pl. miṣ‘ad مصعد
elevator, lift; O anode
مصعدة miṣ‘ada elevator, lift
صاعد ṣā‘id pl. صواعد ṣawā‘id   rising, ascending (also, e.g., of vapors) │ فصاعدا fa-ṣā‘idan and beyond that, and more; من فصاعدا -- from -- on, from --upward; اآلن من فصاعدا (min al-āna) from now on, henceforth
متصاعد mutaṣā‘id rising, ascending (also, e.g., of vapors)
صعر ṣa‘ra a (ṣa‘ar) to be awry (face; with pride) II خده صعر (kaddahū) to put on a contemptuous mien
صعق ṣa‘aqa a (صاعقة ṣā‘iqa) to strike s.o. (ه) down with lightning, destroy, hit, slay (ه s.o.; of lightning); to stun, stupefy, make unconscious (ه s.o.); -- ṣa‘iqa a and pass. ṣi‘iqa (ṣa‘aq, صعقة ṣa‘qa) to be thunderstruck; to lose consciousness │ مكانه في صعق (makānihī) to stop dead in one's tracks, stand as if thunderstruck IV to strike down, slay, destroy (ه s.o.; of lightning); to stun, stupefy, make unconscious (ه s.o.) VII to be struck by lightning
صعق ṣa‘aq thunder, peal of thunder صعق ṣa‘iq thunderstruck, dumfounded صاعقة ṣā‘iqa pl. صواعق ṣawā‘iq   bolt of
lightning, thunderbolt
مصعوق maṣ‘ūq struck by lightning; thunderstruck, stupefied, dumfounded; crushed, destroyed
صعلكة ṣa‘laka loitering, loafing
صعلوك ṣu‘lūk pl. صعاليك ṣa‘ālīk  utterly destitute; have-not, pauper, poor wretch; beggar; tramp, vagabond, loafer
صغر ṣagura u (ṣigar, صغارة ṣagāra) and ṣagira a (ṣagar) to be or become small, little, scanty; to diminish, decrease, wane, dwindle; to be young; to be lowly, submissive, servile, humble; -- ṣagara u (ṣagr) to be younger (ه ب than
s.o. by) │ بسنة اال صغرني ما (bi-sanatin) he was only one year younger than I
II to make small(er) or little(r), lessen, minimize, reduce, diminish, decrease (ھ
 s.th.); to belittle, deride, ridicule, debase, bemean (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to form a diminutive (ھ of a noun) VI to prove o.s. contemptible, be servile, fawn, cringe, grovel X to deem (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) small, little or paltry; to make light (ه ھ، of s.o., of s.th.), undervalue (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to think little (ه ھ، of s.o., of s.th.) │ استصغر نفسه (nafsahū) to feel inferior
صغر ṣigar smallness, littleness, scantiness, paltriness, paucity, insignificance; youthfulness, juvenility (also السن صغر ṣ. as-sinn) 515 صغرة ṣigra: ابويه صغرة ھو (ṣ. abawaihi) he is the youngest of his parents’ children
صغير ṣagīr pl. صغار ṣigār, صغراء ṣugarā’  small, little; paltry, scanty, insignificant; tiny, minute; young, juvenile, minor; a minor, one under age │ السن صغير ṣ. s-sinn young; النفس صغير ṣ. an- nafs mean-spirited, base, servile,
Toadying, cringing, groveling صغار الموظفين ṣ. al-muwaẓẓafīn small officials, subaltern officials; الصغير العيد (‘īd) Little Bairam, i.e., the feast of fast breaking on the 1  of Shawwal; وكبيرة صغيرة كل kullu ṣ. wa-kabīra every detail
صغير ṣagīra pl. صغائر ṣagā’ir  venial sin (Isl. Law); minor mistake; pl. trivialities, trifles
صغارة ṣagāra littleness, paltriness, scantiness, paucity; lowliness, servility, humility, humbleness
اصاغر m. pl. ṣugrā صغرى f. aṣgar اصغر اصغر │ younger littler; smaller, aṣāgir  evils, two of lesser the aš-šarrain a. الشرين الدول الصغرى Minor; Asia آسيا الصغرى سوريا الصغرى countries; small the (duwal) the النھاية الصغرى Palestine; (sūriyā) minimum
تصغير taṣgīr diminution, lessening, decrease, reduction │ التصغير اسم ism at-t. diminutive (gram.)
اصغار iṣgār disdain, contempt, disregard
تصاغر taṣāgur servility, toadying, cringing, groveling
صاغر ṣāgir low, lowly, despised, contemptible, humiliated, meek, dejected; submissive, servile; subject (ل to s.o.)
مصغر muṣaggar reduced, decreased, diminished │ صغيرة صورة في (ṣūra) on a reduced or small scale, in miniature; فلم مصغر (film) microfilm
صغو) and صغي) صغا ṣagā u (صغو ṣagw, sugūw) to incline, bend, lean (الى to, toward); -- صغي ṣagiya a (ṣagan, ṣugīy) to incline, bend, lean (الى to, toward); to listen (ل to) IV to listen, pay attention, lend one’s ear ( ل or الى to s.th., to s.o.). heed (ل or الى s.th.)
صغو ṣagw and صغا ṣagan inclination, disposition, tendency, affection, attachment, good will
اصغاء isgā’ attention, attentiveness
صاغ ṣāgin inclined, disposed, attentive; listener, hearer
مصغ attentive; listener, hearer
وصف see صفة 
 صف ṣaffa u (ṣaff) to set up in a row or line, line up, align, array, arrange, order ( ھ s.th.); to eat, compose (ھ type, typ.); to range, class, classify (ه مع s.o. among); to cut (ھ s.th.) in strips II to set up in a row or line, line up, align, array, arrange, order (ھ s.th.); to comb (ھ the hair) straight VI to line up, take position in a row or line, stand in a row or line, be lined up, be aligned, be strung in a line VIII - VI; to fall in, stand in formation (of a military detachment) │ الطريق جانب الى اصطف to line the rood, form a lane (e.g., troops, police, etc.)
صف ṣaff aligning or arranging in a line or row; -- (pl. صفوف ṣufūf) row, line, file, rank, queue; row, or tier, of seats; grade, form (in school), class course, section, division, group │ الدم صف ṣ. ad-dam, blood group; الحروف صف آلة typesetting machine, الصف ضابط (also ضابط صف pl. ضباط صف) non-commissioned officer; انتظم صفوفا intaẓama ṣufūfan to line up in rows or files
صفة ṣuffa pl. صفف ṣufaf (stone) molding; ledge 516
صفاف ṣaffāf and الحروف صفاف type- setter, compositor
 مصف maṣaff pl. مصاف maṣaff  position (of an army); battle line; row, line, file; composing stick (typ.) │ مصاف الى رفعه (with foll. genit.) to class s.o. with, put
s.o. on the same level with
صفح ṣafaḥa a (ṣafḥ) to broaden, widen, flatten, beat into a leaf, foliate, plate (ھ s.th.); to pardon, forgive (عن s.o., s.th.) II to broaden, widen, flatten,
beat into a leaf, foliate (ھ s.th.); to roll out (ھ s.th.); to plate, overlay, or cover, with metal plates (ھ s.th.); to armor (ھ s.th.); to equip, furnish, cover (ب ھ s.th. with) ill to shake hands (ه with s.o.); to greet (.s.o.); to touch (ھ s.th.) lightly or gently, graze (ھ s.th.), brush, glide (ھ over s.th.), pass, blow (ھ over s.th., of the wind, breath, etc.) │ سمعه صافح (sam‘ahū) to reach s.o.’s ear V to leaf, thumb (ھ a book, etc.); to examine, scrutinize, regard, study (ھ s.th.) VI to shake hands X to ask s.o.’s (ه) forgiveness (ھ for), apologize (ھ ه to s.o. for)
صفح ṣafḥ pardon, forgiveness; (pl. صفاح ṣifāḥ) side, surface │ عنه (اضرب) ضرب صفحا to turn away from s.o. or s.th., pass over s.o. or s.th., ignore, snub, slight, disregard s.o. or s.th., desist from s.th.
صفحة ṣafḥa pl. ṣafaḥāt outside, exterior; plane, surface; page; leaf, sheet; phase
صفيح ṣafīḥ broad side or surface; sheet iron; tin, tinplate; tin plates, tin sheets
صفيحة ṣafīḥa pl. صفائح ṣafā’iḥ  plate, sheet (of metal), leaf (of wood), slab, flag (of stone), ledger stone (on a tomb); tin plate, tin sheet; can, jerry can │ صفائح المصراع ṣ. al-miṣrā‘ door panel; O صفائح المقول ṣ. al-miqwal phonograph records, gramophone discs
صفوح ṣafūhḥ forgiving, reedy to forgive
صفاح ṣuffāḥ pl. -āt, صفافيح ṣafāfīḥ plate, sheet, leaf; flagstone, stone slab
تصفيح taṣfīḥ plating
تصفح taṣaffuḥ examination, scrutinization, scrutiny, study
مصفح muṣaffaḥ, shaped into plates or thin layers, plated, foliated; armored, armor clad, ironclad, metal-covered│ خشب
سيارة مصفحة plywood; (kašab) مصفح
(sayyāra) armored car
مصفحة muṣaffaḥa pl. -āt armored car, armored reconnaissance car (mil.)
صفد ṣafda i (ṣafd) to bind, fetter, shackle (ه s.o.) II and IV = I
صفد ṣafad pl. اصفاد aṣfād bond, tie, fetter
صفاد اليدين │ fetter tie, bond, ṣifād صفاد
ṣ. al-yadain manacle, handcuff
 صفر ṣafara i (صفير ṣafīr) to whistle (bird, person); to hiss (snake); to chirp, stridulate (cricket); to seream (siren) II = I
صفير ṣafīr whistling, whistle, etc. (see above); high, thin tone (e.g., of a flute) │ الصفير حروف sibilants; -- see also below and alphabetically
صفارة ṣaffāra pl. -āt whistle; siren │ األمان صفارة ṣ. al-amān all-clear siren; صفارة اإلنذار ṣ. al-indār warning siren
  صفر II to dye yellow, make yellow, to yellow (ھ s.th.) IX to turn yellow, to
yellow; to pale, become pale │ اصفر وجھه (wajhuhū) he grew pale, he turned white
صفر ṣufr brass; money
صفر ṣafar jaundice
صفرة ṣufra yellow color, yellowness, yellow; pallor, paleness (of the face) 517
صفار ṣafar yellow color, s.th. yellow; pallor, paleness │البيضة صفار ṣ. al-baiḍa egg yolk
صفار ṣaffār pl. ة brass founder
اصفر aṣfar , f. صفراء ṣafrā’ , pl. صفر ṣufr yellow; pale, pallid, wan │ ضحكة صفراء (ḍaḥka) forced, or embarrassed, laugh; صفر نحاس (nuḥās) brass
صفراء ṣafrā’ bile, gall
صفير (eg.) golden oriole (zool.) صفارية ṣufārīya golden oriole (zool.) صفراوي ṣafrāwī bilious; choleric │
الصفراوية الحمى (ḥummā) yellow fever; صفراوية ضحكة (ḍaḥka) bitter, or sardonic, laugh (= Fr. rire jaune)
 اصفرار iṣfirār yellowing, yellow; pallor, paleness (of the face)
مصفر muṣfarr yellow-colored; pale, pallid, wan
 صفر ṣafira a (ṣafar, صفور ṣufūr) to be empty, be devoid, vacant (من of) │ من يده صفرت الشيء (ṣafirat yaduhū) to have lost s.th. II to empty, void, vacate, evacuate, free (ھ s.th.) IV = II
صفر ṣafr, ṣifr, ṣufr, ṣafir, ṣufur pl. اصفار aṣfār empty, void, devoid, (من of), free (من from) │ اليدين صفر ṣifr al-yadain empty- handed
صفر ṣifr zero, naught; nothing
اصفر aṣfar empty, void
مصفر اليد │ empty-handed muṣfir مصفر
m. al-yad with an empty hand; من اليد مصفر شيء كل without any possessions at all, completely destitute
 صفر ṣafar pl. اصفار aṣfār Safar, name of the second month of the Mohammedan year
 صفصف ṣafṣaf (coll.; n. un. ة) a variety of willow (Salix Safsaf F.; bot.)
 صفصف ṣafṣaf even, level; waste, desolate, barren, empty │ صفصف قاع wasteland, desolate area; صفصفا قاعا جعله to devastate s.th., lay s.th. waste
صفع ṣafa‘a a (ṣaf‘) to cuff, buffet, slap lightly (ه s.o.); to slap s.o.’s (ه) face, box s.o.’s (ه) ears; to violate (ھ a rule) VI to slap one another
صفعة ṣaf‘a (n. vic.) slap, cuff, smack; blow
صفاع ṣaffā‘ pl. -ūn a kind of buffoon
صفق ṣafaqa i (ṣafq) to slap, smack (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to aet into motion (ھ s.th.); to flap, clap; to shut, slam, bang (ھ a door); -- ṣafuqa u (صفاقة ṣafāqa) to be thick, heavy, close in texture (cloth) II to flap, clap, smack; to clap one’s hands (also بيديه), applaud (ل s.o.); to flap (ب the wings)
صفقة ṣafqa pl. ṣafaqāt handclasp (in concluding a deal); conclusion of a contract (Isl. Law); deal, bargain, transaction │ خاسرة صفقة poor deal, bad bargain; رابحة صفقة favorable deal, good bargain; واحدة صفقة ṣafqatan wāḥidatan all
اعطى altogether; entirely, wholly, once, at bargain, a conclude to عقد صفقة (a‘ṭā), صفقة عاد )رجع( بصفقة المغبون transaction; a effect empty-handed; return game, the lose to do. كانت له الصفقة الخاسرة
صفاق ṣifāq pl. صفق ṣufuq dermis underskin; peritoneum
صفيق ṣafīq pl. صفاق ṣifāq thick, heavy, close in texture (cloth) │ الوجه صفيق ṣ. al- wajh impudent, insolent, brazen
صفاقة ṣafāqa impudence, insolence, brazenness
تصفيق taṣfīq hand clapping; applause, acclaim │ االستحسان تصفيق applause
صفاكس ṣafākis  Sfax (aeaport in Tunisia) 518
 صفن ṣafana i to stand with one foot (ب) slightly raised; to pore, brood, ponder, reflect, muse
صفن ṣafan pl. اصفان aṣfān scrotum
  صفين ṣafīn (Juniperus Sabina; bot.)
صفو) صفا) ṣafā u (ṣafw, ṣufūw, صفاء ṣafā’) to be or become clear, unpolluted, limpid, cloudless, untroubled, serene, undisturbed, pure; ل صفا to apply o.s. to s.th. with clear intent, devote o.s. wholeheartedly to, be completely given to, be solely preoccupied with, be exclusively ready for (heart, mind) II to make clear, limpid, pure, clarify, clear, purify (ھ s.th.); to settle, straighten out (مسألة mas’alatan a question, a problem); to remove the water, pour off the water (ھ from s.th., e.g., in cooking; also الماء من صفاه ); to rid of moisture, dry out (ھ s.th.); to clarify, purify, rectify (ھ s.th., من by removing s.th.); to filter, strain (ھ s.th.); to settle, pay, liquidate (ھ s.th.); to realize (ھ assets) III to be sincere (ه toward s.o), deal honestly (ه with s.o.) IV = III (ه or ل): to be no longer in a position (to ), posses no longer, forfeit; to cease composing poetry (poet) │ بالشيء اصفاه to have s.o. in mind for s.th., choose, select, or single out s.o. for s.th.. grant s.o. s.th. in preference to others, bestow upon s.o. s.th. (فالن دون which others do not have) VI to be sincere toward one another, be honest with one another, be of pure intent toward one another VIII to choose, select (ه s.o.) X =
 VIII; to deem (ھ s.th.) clear or pure │ ماله استصفى to realize all one’s assets; to confiscate s.o.’s property
صفو ṣafw clearness, clarity, limpidity, untroubledness, cloudlessness, serenity, purity, sheerness; happiness, felicity, pleasure, delight; clear, limpid; untroubled, undisturbed, serene, pure, sheer
صفوة ṣafwa the best, or choicest, part, prime, cream, flower, elite, quintessence
صفا ṣafan (coll.: n. un. صفاة ṣafāh pl.
صفوات ṣafawāt) stone(s), rock(s)
صفوان ṣafwān stones, rocks
صفوة ṣifwa sincere friend, best friend, bosom friend
صفاء ṣafā’ clearness, clarity, limpidity, untroubledness, cloudlessness, serenity, purity, sheerness; happiness, felicity, serenity, gaiety, cheerfulness; sincerity, candor, honesty │ صفاء ساعات pleasant time, delightful hours
صفى ṣafīy clear, limpid, untroubled, undisturbed, serene, cloudless, pure, sheer; (pl. اصفياء aṣfiyā’ ) sincere friend, best friend, bosom friend
صفية ṣafīya pl. صفايا ṣalafīya leader’s share of the loot; lion’s share of the booty
مصفى maṣfan refinery
مصفى miṣfan sieve
مصفاة miṣfāh pl. مصاف maṣāfin strainer, colander, filter; strainer cloth; sieve; refinery, purification plant │ القھوة مصفاة coffee filter, percolator
تصفية taṣfiya pl. -āt clarification, clearance, purification (also fig.); filtering, filtration; elimination (also in sports); settlement, straightening out, adjustment; clearing (com.); liquidation (com.); clearance sale │ الحسابات تصفية t. al-ḥisābāt settlement of accounts; التصفية مأمور  official receiver, receiver in equity
مصافاة muṣāfāh cordiality, concord, harmony; good will, sincere attitude or disposition 519
تصاف taṣāfin peaceful settlement, compromise (بين between)
اصطفاء iṣṭifā’ selection (also biol.)
اصطفاء األموال istiṣfā’: استصطفاء
sequestration of property
صاف ṣāfin clear, limpid; sheer, pure, straight, unmixed, undiluted, unadulterated; untroubled, undisturbed; serene; pure; net │ النية صافى ṣ. an-nīya sincere, candid, openhearted; الحمولة صافي net tonnage; األرباح صافى net profit
مصف muṣaffin official receiver, receiver in equity; clarifier, clarifying agent
مصفى muṣaffan purified, pure, clear, limpid, cloudless
مصطفى mušṭafan chosen, selected;
المصطفى epithet of Mohammed
صفير ṣafīr sapphire
صقالة (It. scala) ṣaqāla pl. صقائل ṣaqā’il 
scaffold; gangway, gangplank
صقب III to approach (ه s.o.), go or come near (ه s.o.); to be neighbor (ه with s.o.), be adjacent (ھ to s.th.), adjoin (ھ s.th.)
O مصاقبة muṣāqaba affinity
 صقر ṣaqr pl. صقور ṣuqūr, اصقر aṣqur saker, falcon, hawk
 صاقور ṣaqūr stone axe
صقع ṣaqa‘a a (ṣaq‘, صقاع ṣuqā‘) to crow (rooster); pass. ṣuqi‘a to be covered with hoarfrost (ground) II to be icy, ice-cold, frozen
صقع ṣuq‘ pl. اصقاع aṣqā‘ area, region, country, district, locality, land │ األصقاع الجنوبية المتجمدة (mutajammida, janūbīya) the Antarctic
صقعة ṣaq‘a frost, severe cold صقيع saqī‘ frost; ice; hoarfrost اصقع asqa‘  more eloquent مصقع miṣqa‘ pl. مصاقع maṣāqi‘
eloquent; loud-voiced, having a stentorian voice
 صقل ṣaqala u (ṣaql, صقال ṣiqāl) to smooth, polish, burnish, cut (ھ s.th.); to refine (ھ style, taste, and the like) VII to become smooth
 صقل ṣaqala u polishing, burnishing │ األذھان صقل mental training
صقيل ṣaqīl polished, burnished; smooth, shiny, glossy
صقال ṣaqqāl polisher. smoother
صيقل ṣaiqal pl. -āt مصاقل maṣāqil 
polisher, smoother
maṣāqil  مصاقل pl. miṣqala مصقلة
burnisher (tool)
مصقول maṣqūl polished, burnished; cut (glass, and the like); acute, refined (wit)
  صقالة look up alphabetically
صقلب ṣaqlab pl. صقالبة ṣaqāliba Slav
صقلية ṣiqillīya Sicily
 صك ṣakka u (ṣakk) to beat, strike; to shut, lock (ھ the door) │ اآلذان به صكت his ears were tingling or ringing; سمعه صك (sam‘ahū) to strike s.o.’s ear (noise); to roar in s.o.’s ears VIII to knock together, shake, tremble, (knees), chatter (teeth)
 صك ṣakk pl. صكوك ṣukūk, صكاك ṣikāk, اصك aṣukk (instrunlent of) contract (Isl. Law); legal instrument, document, deed; check, cheque
وصل see صلة 
 صل ṣalla i (صليل ṣalīl) to ring, clink, clank, clatter, rattle
صل ṣill pl. اصالل aṣlāl, صالل ṣilāl a variety of venomous adder, viper
صليل ṣalīl rattle, clatter, clash (e.g., of weapons), jingling (of coins) 521
 صلب ṣaluba u (صالبة ṣalāba) and ṣaliba a to be or become hard, firm, solid, stiff, or rigid, solidify, harden, set, stiffen II to make hard, firm, solid, stiff, or rigid, harden, solidify, stiffen, indurate (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to support, prop, shore up (A s.th.); to harden (ھ the heart) V = I; to show o.s. hard or severe
صلب ṣulb hard, firm, solid, stiff, rigid; steel; -- (pl. اصلب aṣlub, اصالب aṣlāb) spinal column, backbone; loins; -- text,
body (of a book, and the like) │ صلب الرأي ṣ. ar-ra’y obstinate, stubborn, headstrong, opinionated; الرقبة صلب ṣ. ar- raqaba do.; العود صلب ṣ. al-‘ūd of robust
physique, strongly built, husky, sturdy; stubborn, resistant, unbending, unyielding, relentless; صلبه ابن ھو (ibn ṣulbihī) and ھو صلبه من he is his own son, his offspring; الحياة صلب من مستخرجة درامة (mustakraja min ṣulbi l-ḥayāh) a drama taken from real life; صلبه في at heart, in his innermost
صلبة ṣulba: العين صلبة ṣ. al-4ain sclera (anat.)
صليب ṣalīb hard, firm, solid, stiff, rigid
صالبة ṣalāba hardness, callousness; hardening, induration; firmness, solidity, stiffness, rigidity; stubbornness, obstinacy, unyieldingness; intolerance │ العود صالبة ṣ. al-‘ūd sternness, severity, hardness, obstinacy, stubbornness, inflexibility, relentlessness
تصلب taṣallub hardness, callousness, hardening │ الشرابين تصلب t. aš-šarābīn arteriosclerosis
متصلب mutaṣallib unyielding, inflexible, relentless, hard
 صلب ṣalaba i (ṣalb) to crucify (ه s.o.) II = I; to make the sign of the cross (على over); to cross o.s.; to cross, fold (ھ one’s arms)
صلب ṣulb crucifixion
ṣulub صلب ṣulbān, صلبان pl. ṣalīb صليب the (janūbī) الصليب الجنويب │ cross the الصليب األحمر (astron.); Cross Southern شارة swastika; صليب معقوف Cross; Red cross the of sign اشارة الصليب and الصليب peony aṣ-ṣ. ‘ūd عود الصليب (Chr.); bot.) (Paeonis;
the الحروب الصليبية ṣalībī: صليبي crusaders the الصليبيون crusades;
صلبوت ṣalbūt (representation of the) crucifixion, crucifix
مصلب muṣallab crossing, interjunction (of roads)
صلت ṣaluta u (صلوتة ṣulūta) to be glossy, be smooth and shining IV to draw, unsheathe (السيف as-saifa the sword); pass. uṣlita to be drawn (sword)
 صلج ṣullaj (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. -āt cocoon, chrysalis of the silkworm
 صولجان look up alphabetically
 صلح ṣalaḥa u a (صالح ṣalāḥ, صلوح ṣulūḥ, مصلحة maṣlaḥa) and ṣaluḥa u (صالح ṣalāḥ, صالحية ṣaāḥīya) to be good, right, proper, in order, righteous, pious, godly; to be well, thrive; to be usable, useful, practicable, serviceable, fitting, suitable, or appropriate (ل for), lend itself (ل to), suit, match (ل s.th.), fit (مع s.th. or s.o.), apply (مع to s.o. or s.th.); to be admissible, permissible (مع in, at, with); to be valid. hold true (ل for) II to put in order, settle, adjust, restore, restitute (ھ s.th.), make amends, compensate (ھ for); to mend, improve, ameliorate, fix, repair (ھ s.th.) III to make peace, become reconciled, make up, reach a compromise or settlement (ه with s.o.); to foster peace (بين between), reconcile (بين people) IV to put in order, settle, adjust (من or ھ s.th.), overhaul, restore, restitute, rebuild, reconstruct; to make amends, compensate (من or 521 ھ for); to mend, improve, ameliorate, fix, repair (من or ھ s.th.); to make suitable or fitting, adjust, modify (ھ s.th.); to reform (من or ھ s.th.); to remove, remedy (من or ھ s.th.); to make arable or cultivable, reclaim, cultivate, till, (ھ land); to further, promote, encourage (ه s.o.), make (ه s.o.) thrive or prosper, bring good luck (ه to s.o.); to make peace (بين between), bring together (بين people), bring about an agreement (بين between), conciliate (بين people) VI to make peace, make up, become reconciled with one another VII to be put in order, be righted, be corrected, be improved, be ameliorated VIII = VI; to agree (على on), accept, adopt (على s.th.) X to deem (ه s.th.) good, proper, suitable, fitting, usable, useful, practicable, or serviceable; to make arable, cultivable, reclaim (ھ land)
صلح ṣulḥ peace, (re)conciliation, settlement, composition, compromise; peace (pol.), peacemaking, conclusion of peace │ الصلح حاكم (Syr.) justice of the peace; الصلح قاضي do.; الصلح قضوية qaḍawīyat aṣ-ṣ. jurisdiction of the قاضي الصلح
صلحي ṣulḥī of peace, peace (adj.); arbitrative, arbitrational, arbitration (in compounds) │ صلحية لجنة (lajna) arbitration committee
صالح ṣalāḥ goodness, properness, rightness; usability, practicability, usefulness; righteousness, probity, piety, godliness
صالحية ṣalāḥīya suitability, fitness, appropriateness, aptness; efficiency; usability, practicability, usefulness, use, worth; serviceability, proper or working condition (e.g., of a machine); competence; validity. applicability; (pl.
-āt) full or mandatory power. power of attorney, also تامة صالحية (tāmma) │ جھات صالحية ذات competent authorities; مطلق الصالحية muṭlaq aṣ-ṣ. plenipotentiary (dipl.)
ṣalāḥīya صالحية = ṣalūḥīya صلوحية
اصلح aṣlaḥ  better, more proper, more correct; more pious, godlier; fitter, more suitable
مصلحة maṣlaḥa pl. مصالح maṣāliḥ  matter, affair; requirement. exigency; that which is beneficial, helpful, or promoting; advantage, benefit, interest, good, welfare; office, authority, department, governmental agency, administration (chiefly Eg.) │ المصرية اآلثار مصلحة (miṣrīya) Administration of Egyptian Antiquities; األمة مصالح m. al-umma the welfare of the people; البريد مصلحة postal administration; الحدود مصلحة administrative agency for the territories outside the cultivated area (Eg.); الحكومية المصالح (ḥukūmīya) the governmental agencies; الصحة مصلحة m. aṣ-ṣiḥḥa health office; العامة المصلحة (‘āmma) public welfare, commonweal; فالن مصلحة في in s.o.’s interest; والمفسدة المصلحة في (mafsada) in good and bad times, for better or for worse; فالن لمصلحة in s.o.’s favor, for the benefit of s.o., to s.o.’s advantage, on behalf of s.o., in s.o.’s interest; مصالح خدم فالن to serve s.o.’s interests
مصلحي maṣlaḥī administrational, official, governmental
تصليح taṣlīḥ restoration, restitution, mending, fixing, overhauling, repair, improvement, amelioration
مصالحة muṣālaḥa peace, conciliation; compromise; composition, settlement
 اصالح iṣlāḥ pl. -āt restoration, restitution, redressing, reparation; improvement, amelioration, betterment, mending, correction; reconstruction; reconditioning, repair; renovation, refurbishing; adjustment, settling, remedying, removal, elimination; restoration of 522 order, establishment of peace, happiness and order; reformation, reform; reclamation, cultivation (of land); (re)conciliation, settlement, compromise, peacemaking (بين between)
اصالحي iṣlāḥī reformatory, reformational, reform- (in compounds); reformer, reformist │ اصالحي معھد (ma‘had) reformatory, house of correction
اصالحية iṣlāḥīya revisionism, reformism; (pl. -āt) reformatory, house of correction
تصالح taṣāluḥ (re)conciliation
اصطالح iṣṭilāḥ pl. -āt agreement, convention, practice, usage; (colloquial, linguistic) usage; technical term, terminus technicus
اصطالحي iṣṭilāḥī conventional; technical (of a term)
استصالح istiṣlāḥ reclamation, cultivation
صالح ṣāliḥ good, right, proper, sound; thorough, substantial, downright, out-and- out, solid; virtuous, pious, devout, godly; usable, useful, practicable, serviceable, fitting, suitable, appropriate (ل for); (pl. صوالح ṣawāliḥ) advantage, benefit, interest, good, welfare │ الصالح السلف (salaf) the worthy ancestors, the venerable forefathers; السير صالح (sair) passable, practicable (road); للعمل صالح (‘amal) fit  for action, ready for use, serviceable, practicable; valid (ل for), applicable (ل to); العام الصالح (‘āmm) public welfare, commonweal; صالح في (with foll. genit.) in favor of, for the benefit of, to the advantage of, in the interest of s.o. or s.th.; لصالح do.; صالحه من كان it was in his interest; شخصية صوالح (šakṣīya) personal interests
الصالحات aṣ-ṣāliḥāt the good works, the good deeds
مصالح muṣāliḥ peacemaker, conciliator
مصلح muṣliḥ peacemaker, conciliator; reformer, reformist; salt
مصطلح muṣṭalaḥ and عليه مصطلح generally accepted, universally followed, commonly established, conventional, customary; (pl. -āt technical term, terminus techniques
صلد ṣalada (صالدة ṣalāda, صلودة ṣulūda) to be or become hard, firm, solid, compact (ground) IV = I
صلد ṣald pl. اصالد aṣlād hard, firm, solid, dry, barren, arid (ground); rigid, lifeless, inert
صلودة ṣulūda hardness, firmness, solidity (of the ground)
صلصة (It. salsa) ṣalṣa pl. -āt and صلص sauce
mayonnaise صلصة مايونيز │
صلصل ṣalṣala to ring, clink, clank; to clatter, rattle, II taṣalṣala do.
صلصلة ṣalṣala clank(ing), clatter(ing), clash, rattle
صلصال ṣalsāl dry clay, argillaceous earth
مصلطح muṣalṭaḥ = مسلطح shallow, shoal, flat
صلع ṣali‘a a (ṣala‘) to be bald
صلع ṣala‘ baldness
صلعة ṣul‘a, ṣala‘a bald pate, bald head
ṣul‘, صلع pl. ṣal‘ā’ , صلعاء aṣla‘ , اصلع
صلعان ṣul‘ān bald(-headed)
صلعم abbreviation of the eulogy following the name of the Prophet Mohammed: ﷲ صلى وسلم عليه (ṣallā, ṣallam) God bless him and grant him salvation!
صلف ṣalifa a (ṣalaf) to boast, brag, bluster, swagger V = I
صلف ṣalaf vainglory, bragging, boasting, conceit, arrogance, pomposity, self-importance 523
صلف ṣalif pl. صلفاء ṣulafā’  vainglorious, bragging, boastful, showing off, pompous, blustering, swagering; braggart, boaster, show-off, swaggerer, fourflusher
 تصلف taṣalluf vainglory, bragging, boasting, conceit, arrogance, pomposity, self-importance
متصلف mutaṣallif vainglorious, bragging, boastful, showing off, pompous, blustering, swagering
صلو II to perform the salat (صلوة see below), pray, worship │ بالناس صلى to lead people in prayer; على صلى to pray for; (of God) to bless s.o.: وسلم عليه ﷲ صلى (sallam) God bless him and grant him salvation! (eulogy after the name of the Prophet Mohammed)
صالة صلوة، ṣalāh pl. صلوات ṣalawāt salat, the official Islamic prayer ritual; intercession, intercessory prayer, benediction; blessing, grace (of God) │ الربانية الصالة (rabbānīyra) the Lord’s prayer; التراويح صالة a prayer performed during the nights of Ramadan; الستار صالة vesper prayer (Chr.)
مصل muṣallin prayer, worshiper
مصلى muṣallan place of prayer, oratory
صلون ṣalūn salon, parlor, reception room
صلى ṣallā i (ṣaly) to roast, broil, fry (ھ s.th.);
-- ṣaliya a (ṣalan, ṣulīy, صالء ṣilā’) to burn (intr.; ب or ھ in); to be exposed to the blaze of (ب or ھ) II to warm, heat (ھ ب s.th. with or on) IV = II (ھ ھ s.th. on or with); to make (ه s.o.) burn (ھ in. esp. النار in the fire) │ الغيرة من نارا اصاله (gaira) to make s.o. undergo the most excruciating pangs of jealousy; نارا اصاله to set s.th. on fire; to fire at s.o. or s.th. (mil.) V to warm o.s., seek warmth (ب at, by, بالنار by the fire) VIII = V│بناره يصطلى ال (yuṣṯalā bi- nārihī) invincible, a great hero
مصطلى muṣṯalan fireplace
صم ṣamma (1  pers. perf. ṣamimtu) a (ṣamm, صممṣamam) to be or become deaf; -- ṣamma (1  pers. perf. ṣamamtu) u (ṣamm) to close, plug, cork, stopper (ھ s.th., e.g., a bottle) II to deafen (ه s.o.); to make up one’s mind (على to do s.o.); to make up one’s mind (على to do s.th.), determine ( على upon, to do s.th.), resolve, be determined (على to do s.th.), decide (على on, to do s.th.); to persist (على in); to deoign (ھ s.th.); to plan (ھ s.th.), design ( ل ھ s.th. for) IV to be or become deaf; to
deafen (ه s.o.), make (. s.o.) deaf (عن ,ھ to s.th.) VI to give a deaf ear (عن to)
صمة ṣimma plug, cork, stopper
deaf be to كان في صمم عن│ deafness صمم s.th. to
صمام ṣimām pl. -āt plug, cork, stopper; valve, tube (radio) │ األمن) األمان صمام) s. al-amān (al-amn) safety valve; O صمام التقويم rectifier tube; عن الصمام رفع to let s.th. take its course, give free rein to s.th. (also to a feeling)
O صمامة ṣammāma embolism (med.)
صميم ṣamīm innermost, heart; core, essence, marrow, pith; true, sincere, genuine │ القلب صميم من (ṣ. il-qalb) from the bottom of the heart, wholeheartedly, most sincerely; صميم في ... amid, in; ضربه الصميم في to affect s.o. to the very core, touch s.o. most deeply
صميمي cordial, hearty
اصم aṣamm , f. صماء ṣammā’ , pl. صم ṣumm, صمان ṣummān deaf; hard and solid, massive (rock); األصم the deaf one, epithet of the month of Rajab │ اصم فعل (fi‘l) triliteral verb with identical second and third radical, verbum mediae geminatae (gram.); اصلخ اصم (aṣlak) stone-deaf; جذر اصم (jadr) irrational or surd root (math.), صماء آلة willing tool
تصميم taṣmīm determination (على for, to do s.th.), resolution, decision; resolute 524 action; tenacious pursuit (of a plan); planning, projecting; design, designing (e.g., of a dress); (pl. –āt, تصاميم taṣāmīm ) plan; design; sketch│فالن تصميم من designed by so-and so
مصمم muṣammim determined (على to do s.th.)│االزياء مصمم fashion creator, designer
صمت ṣamata u (ṣamt, صموت ṣumūt) to be silent, be taciturn, hold one’s tongue, hush up, be or become quiet or still II to silence (ه s.o.) IV = II
صمت ṣamt silence │ صمت في silently, quietly
صموت ṣumūt silence; pl. of act. participle صامت
صموت ṣamūt silent, taciturn
 │ silent ṣumūt صموت pl. ṣāmit صامت film silent سينما صامتة
مصمت muṣammat uniform (color); plain, unpatterned, blank (wall); uniform in texture, made of a single material; massive, solid, not hollow, compact
صماخ ṣimàk pl. اصمخة aṣmika auditory meatus
صمد ṣamada u (ṣamd) to betake o.s., repair, go (ه ,ھ or ل or الى to, into, toward), to turn, apply o.s. (ھ or ل or الى to s.th.); -- (صمود ṣumūd) to defy, hrave, withstand (وجھه في fī wajhihī or ل s.o., s.th.), to stand up (في وجھه or ل against s.o. or s.th.), resist, oppose (وجھه في or الى s.o. or s.th.); to hold out (وجھه في or ل against); -- i to close, plug, cork, stopper (ھ s.th., e.g., a bottle) II to betake o.s., repair, go (ه to s.o., ھ to, toward), to close, plug, cork, stopper (ھ s.th., e.g., a bottle), to save, lay by (money) III to come to blows, fight (ه with s.o.)
صمد ṣamad lord; eternal, everlasting (epithet of God)
صمدانى ṣamadānī eternal, everlasting
صمادة ṣimāda (ir.) headcloth (worn by men)
صمصم ṣamṣama to persist (فى in)
صومعة ṣauma‘a pl. صوامع ṣawāmi‘  monk’s cell, hermitage; silo (for grain storage); (mor.) minaret
صمغ II to gum (ھ s.th.); to paste, glue (ھ s.th.) IV to exude gum (tree)
صمغ samg pl. صموغ ṣumūg gum, resin
│ سائل صمغ mucilage; عربي صمغ (‘arabī) gum arabic; اللك صمغ s. al-lakk shellac; مرن صمغ (marin) rubber, caoutchouc; صمغ ھندي (hindī) do.; الصمغ شجر šajar aṣ-ṣ. rubber trees
صمغي ṣamgī gummy, gummiferous, gumlike, mucilaginous
تصميغ taṣmīg gumming; resinification
 صمل ṣamala u (ṣaml) to be firm, be hard, hold one’s ground, stand firm, hold out, last, endure
صمل ṣaml rigidity, stiffness, │ صمل جيفي (jīfī) rigor mortis
 صمولة ṣamūla pl. صوامل ṣawāmil , صامولة ṣāmūla pl. صواميل ṣawāmīl  nut (of a bolt), rivet
صمالخ ṣimlāk pl. صماليخ ṣamālīk  earwax, cerumen
صمى IV to deal (ه s.o.) a fatal blow, to hit (ه ,ھ s.o., s.th.) fatally │ فاصمى رمى ramā fa- aṣmā to shoot and hit, shoot dead on the spot
صن ṣann basket
صنة ṣinna odor emanating from the armpit
صنان ṣunān odor emanating from the armpit
صنارة ṣinnāra pl. صنانير ṣanānīr  hook, fishhook 525
صنبور ṣanbūr pl. صنابير ṣanābīr  (water) faucet, tap
صنبر look up alphabetically
صنتيم ṣantīm pl. -āt centime (1/100 franc)  صنج ṣanj pl. صنوج ṣunūj cymbal (mus.)  صنجة ṣinja =  سنجة
 صنجات ṣanajāt castanets
سنجق see ṣanjaqīya صنجقية
صنديد ṣindīd pl. صناديد ṣanādīd leader, notable; brave, valiant
صندوق ṣundūq, ṣandūq pl. صناديق ṣanādīq  crate, box; chest; trunk, suitcase; case, cabinet; money box; till, coffer; pay office, treasurer’s office; any public institution where funds are deposited and disbursed for a special purpose (e.g., sick fund, health insurance, etc.) │ البريد صندوق post-office box; المكاتب صندوق  mailbox; الدولي النقد صندوق ṣ. an-naqd ad-duwalī International Monetary Fund; التوفير صندوق savings bank; الصندوق ابو (eg.) hunchback; الصندوق امين treasurer; الصندوق دفتر daftar aṣ-ṣ. cashbook
صندل ṣandal sandalwood; sandals; (pl. صنادل
ṣanādil ) (freight) barge; lighter, barge
صنارة look up alphabetically
 صنع ṣana‘a a (ṣan‘, ṣun‘, صنيع ṣanī‘) to do, make (ھ s.th.); to arrange, stage, put on (ھ s.th.); to produce, build, manufacture,
 fabricate, design (ھ s.th.); to work, treat, process (ھ s.th.) │ معروفا اليه صنع to do s.o. a favor; جميال معه صنع do.; ھ به صنع to do s.th. to s.o.; قبيحا صنيعا به صنع to do s.o. a dirty trick II to industrialize (ھ s.th.) ill to cooperate, go along (ه ھ، with); to flatter, cajole (ه s.o.); to bribe (ه ب s.o. with) V to pretend, feign, stimulate, fake, sham, affect (ھ s.th.); to speak or write in an artificial, affected, stilted, or mannered way; to use means for enhancing her beauty (woman) VIII to order, commission (ھ s.th.); to create (ھ s.th.) synthetically; to produce, manufacture, make, fabricate (ھ s.th.); to pretend, feign, fake, assume falsely (ھ s.th.); to invent (ھ s.th.); to make (ه ل s.th. into), take, use (ل ھ s.th. for); to commit, bind (ه ل s.o. to) X to have (ه s.o.) make (ھ s.th.)
صنع ṣan‘, ṣan‘ production, manufacture, fabrication, making, design, make, workmanship │ اليد صنع ṣ. al-yad handwork; الصنع بديع badī‘ aṣ-ṣan‘ of wonderful workmanship
صنعي ṣan‘ī artificial, synthetic
صنع ṣun‘ benefit, favor
صنعة ṣan‘a work, workmanship, making, manufacture, fabrication; art; technical skill, artistic skill; work, craft, trade, business, occupation, vocation, profession │الصنعة صاحب artisan, craftsman; expert, specialist
صناع ṣanā‘: اليد صناع ṣ. al-yad skillful, skilled, dexterous, deft
صناعة ṣinā‘a pl. -āt, صنائع ṣanā’i‘  art, skill; occupation, vocation, calling, business, profession; handicraft; trade, craft; industry; pl. branches of industry, industries │ شريفة صناعة honorable, respectable trade; الصناعات ارباب the artisans, craftsmen; الصناعة رجل rajul aṣ-ṣ. industrialist; والحرف الصنائع اصحاب (ḥiraf) artisans and tradesmen
صنائعي ṣanā’i‘ī artificial, synthetic, imitation; workmanlike, handicraft, trade (adj.); industrial; artisan, craftsman
صناعي ṣinā‘ī artificial, synthetic, imitation; workmanlike, handicraft, trade (adj.); industrial │ صناعي سر (sirr)
industrial secret; الصناعي الفن (fann) applied arts, artistic handicraft 526
صنيع ṣanī‘ action, acting, doing; act, deed; fact; good deed, benefit, favor; charge, protégé; creature, willing tool; meal, repast, banquet
صنيعة ṣanī‘a pl. صنائع ṣanā’i‘  action, deed; good deed, good turn, benefit, favor; charge, protégé; creature, willing tool
مصنع maṣna‘ pl. مصانع maṣāni‘  factory, plant, mill, works; establishment, firm; مصانع also: large structures, installations, man-made works │ المصانع (اصحاب) ارباب manufacturers, industrialists
مصنعية maṣna‘īya wages, pay
تصنيع taṣnī‘ industrialization
تصنع taṣannu‘ hypocrisy, dissimulation, dissemblement; affectedness affectation, mannerism
اصطناع iṣṭinā‘ production, making
اصطناعي iṣṭinā‘ī artificial, synthetic, imitation
صانع ṣāni‘ pl. صناع ṣunnā‘ maker, producer, manufacturer, creator; artisan, craftsman; worker, workman, laborer; servant
مصنوع product, produce; pl. مصنوعات (industrial) products, produce, articles, manufactured goods
متصنع mutaṣanni‘ subtilizing, overrefining; affected, stilted, mannered
مصطنع muṣṭana‘ artificial, synthetic; affected, simulated, imitated, sham,
bogus, phony │ مصطنع مفتاح (miftāḥ) duplicate key, masterkey
 صنعاء ṣan‘ā’ San‘a (capital of Yemen)
صنف II to sort, assort, classify, categorize (ھ s.th.); to compile, compose, write (ھ a book)
صنف ṣanf, ṣinf pl. اصناف aṣnāf, صنوف ṣunūf kind, sort, specimen; article (com.); genus, species, class, category; sex; صنفا in kind (as oppose to: in cash)
تصنيف taṣnīf classification.
Categorization, sorting, assorting;
 compilation, composition, writing; (pl.
تصانيف taṣānīf ) literary work
تصنيفة taṣnīfa assortment, selection
مصنف muṣannif author, writer
مصنف muṣannaf pl. -āt literary work
صنفر ṣanfara to rub with sandpaper, to sandpaper, to emery (ھs.th.)
صنفر ṣanfar and صنفرة ṣanfara emery
صنم ṣanam pl. اصنام aṣnām idol, image
صنو ṣinw pl. صنوان ṣinwān, اصناء aṣnā’ one of two, twin brother
صنوبر ṣanaubar stone pine (Pinus pinea; bot.)
│ الصنوبر حب ḥabb aṣ-ṣ. pine nut, pinon
صنوبري ṣanaubarī pine (adj.). piny, pine-like; pineal │ الصنوبرية الغدة (gudda) pineal gland
صه ṣah pst! hush! quiet!
صھب IX and XI iṣhābba to be or become reddish, red-brown
اصھب aṣhab , f. صھباء ṣahhbā’ , pl.
wine الصھباء reddish; ṣuhb صھب
صھد ṣahada a (ṣahd) to scorch, parch, burn (ھ ه s.o., s.th., esp. of the sun)
صھد ṣahd beat
صھيد ṣahīd scorching beat, blaze
صھود ṣuhūd scorching heat, blaze
صھر ṣahara a (ṣahr) to melt, fuse, smelt (ھ s.th.) III to become related by marriage (في or ه to s.o.) IV to become related by marriage (الى or ب to s.o.) VI to be related by marriage VII to melt, fuse; to melt away, vanish, break (intr.) 527
صھر ṣihr relationship by marriage; -- (pl. اصھار aṣhār) husband of one’s daughter, son-in-law; husband of one’s sister, brother-in-law
صھير ṣahīr molten, in fusion
مصاھر maṣāhir  (pl.) smelting furnaces; blast furnaces
O مصھر miṣhar pl. -āt fuse (el.)
مصاھرة muṣāhara relationship by marriage; O affinity
سلك O │ process melting inṣihār انصھار (el.) fuse al-wāqī al-ins. silk االنصھار الواقى
صھريج ṣihrīj, ṣahrīj صھاريج ṣahārīj  cistern; large (water) container, tank
صھل ṣahala a i (صھيل ṣahīil) to whinny, neigh (horse)
صھيل ṣahīl whinny(ing), neighing
صھوة ṣahwa pl. ṣahawāt, صھاء ṣihā’ back (of a horse)
صھيون ṣahyūn , also ṣihyaun  Zion
صھيوني ṣahyūnī, ṣihyaunī Zionistic,
Zionist
صھيونية ṣahyūnīya, ṣihyaunīya Zionism
 صوب) صاب) ṣāba u (ṣaub, صيبوبة ṣaibūba) to hit (ھ s.th., the target); to be right, hold true, be to the point, hit the mark, be pertinent, be apposite (opinion) │ ام صاب اقلع (am aqla‘a) by all means, under all circumstances II to direct, fix (ھ الى s.th., also, e.g., the glance on, to), aim, point, train (ھ الى s.th. at or on); to agree (ه with s.o.), concur (ه ھ، with s.o., in s.th.), consent, assent (ھ to s.th.), approve (ھ of s.th.), sanction (ھ s.th.) IV to hit (ھ a target); to attain, reach, achieve (ھ s.th., e.g., end, purpose); to reach out (ھ for s.th., of the hand); to get, obtain, win, gain (ھ e.g., a fortune), acquire (ھ s.th.ه e.g.ه a certain amount of knowledge); to have, eat (ھ a snack); to take (ھ a meal); to befall (ه s.o.), fall (ه upon s.o.), happen (ه to s.o.); to allot (ه ب to s.o. s.th.), bestow ( ه ب upon s.o. s.th.), make (ب s.th.) fall to s.o.’s (ه) lot; to cause losses (من to s.o.); to be right, be in the right; to do the right thing, hit the mark; to do right, properly (ه s.th., expressed by a verbal noun); to say the right word; pass اصيب uṣība to be stricken, attacked, afflicted (ب by a disease, and the like); to be killed │ اصاب اصابات (iṣābāt) to score, make goals (in sports); عمله في اصاب (‘amalihī) to do right, act properly; بجراح اصيب to incur multiple wounds; بخسارة اصيب (bi-kasāratin) to suffer a loss; شديدة اصابة اصيب (iṣābatan) to be hard hit, be grievously afflioted X استوصب istauṣaba to approve (ه of s.th.), sanction (ھ s.th.)
 صوب ṣaub direction, quarter; that which is right, proper, or correct; ṣauba (prep.) in the direction of, toward, to │ من وصوب حدب كل (ḥadabin) or صوب كل من وحدب or وحدب فج كل من (fajjin) from all sides, from all directions, from all quarters, from everywhere; صوب كل في وحدب every place, everywhere, all over, in all quarters
صيب ṣayyib rain cloud
صابة ṣāba pl. -āt harvest (tun.)
صواب ṣawāb that which is right, proper, or correct; right, proper, or correct; rightness, correctness, properness; reason, intellect, mind, consciousness; صوابا ṣawāban rightly, justly │ الصواب على ھو he is right; والحق الصواب طريق سلك (ḥaqq) to act in exactly the right manner, pursue the right course; صوابه الى (فاء) رجع to regain one’s reason, get back to one’s senses, become reasonable again; فقد صوابه، اضاع صوابه to lose one’s mind; صوابه عن غاب to lose consciousness; صوابه عن غائب unconscious, senseless 528
اصوب aṣwab  more pertinent, more apropos, more apposite, more proper, more correct
اصوبية aṣwabīya advisability, expediency
تصويب taṣwīb aiming; turning, pointing; (pl. -āt) correction, rectification
اصابة isāba pl. -āt hit; goal, score (in sports); injury, wound; state or process of being afflicted (by a disease), (attack of) illness, sickness; accident │ العمل اصابة i. al-‘amal industrial accident; االصابة محل maḥall al-i. scene of the accident
استصواب istiṣwāb approval
صائب ṣā’ib pertinent, apropos, apposite, right, correct; suited, appropriate
مصيب muṣīb pertinent, apropos, apposite, right, correct; suited, appropriate
مصيبة muṣība pl. -āt, مصائب maṣā’ib 
misfortune, calamity, disaster
مصاب muṣāb stricken, befallen, attacked, afflicted (ب by); injured, wounded, sick, ill; wounded person, casualty; victim of an accident;
misfortune, calamity, disaster │اليم مصاب grievous misfortune, mournful event, death
 صوبة (Turk. soba) ṣōbe stove (syr.)
صوت) صات) ṣāta u a (ṣāut) to ring, sound, make a noise or sound; to raise one’s voice, about II = I; to vote, cast ballots (at an election)
صوت ṣaut pl. اصوات aṣwāt sound (also phon.); voice; tone, strain; melody, tune; noise; fame, renown; vote; pl. interjections (gram.) │ الصوت بعد bu‘d aṣ- ṣ. fame, celebrity; الصوت رجع raj‘ aṣ-ṣ. echo, reverberation; األصوات علم ‘ilm al-a. phonetics; الصوت قوة qūwat aṣ-ṣ. volume, intensity (radio); مسموع بصوت audibly; عال بصوت aloud; واطئ بصوت (wāṭi’) softly, in a low voice, under one’s breath
صوتي ṣautī sonant, sound- (in compounds), vocal, sonic, acoustic; resounding, resonant, sonorous; phonetic
صوتيات ṣautīyāt phonetics
صوات ṣuwāt crying, shouting, clamor
صيت ṣīt (good) repute, standing, prestige; fame, renown; celebrity, famousness │ الصوت بعد bu‘d as.-ṣ. fame, celebrity; الصيت ذائع famous, celebrated, well-known
صيت sayyit loud-voiced, having a stentorian voice; O loud-speaker (Syr.)
O مصوات miṣwāt microphone
تصويت taṣwīt voting, vote, casting of ballots, polling (election)
صائت ṣā’it sound- (in compounds) │ O
film sound سينما صائتة
مصوت muṣawwit voter; entitled to vote, franchised
صاج look up alphabetically
صوح II to dry (ھ s.th.)
مصوح muṣawwaḥ withered, dried (herb, etc.)
u sāka ساخ = u ṣāka )صاخ )صوخ 
  صوخIV to listen, lend one’s ear (الى or ل to s.o., to s.th.)
صاد name of the letter ص
 صودا soda │ كاوية صودا (kāwiya) caustic soda, sodium hydroxide; الصودا نترات (nitrāt) sodium nitrate
صوديوم (Lat. sodium) sodium
صور II to form, shape, mold, fashion, create ( ھ s.th.); to paint, draw, sketch (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to illustrate (with drawings or pictures, ھ s.th.); to make a picture (ه ھ، of s.o., of s.th.); to photograph (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to represent, portray (ھ s.th., fig.) │ له صور (ṣuwwira) it appeared to him, seemed to him 529 V = pass. of II; to imagine, fancy, conceive (ھ s.th.); to think (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) to be s.o. or s.th. (ه ھ،); to seem, appear, look (ل to s.o.) │ يتصور ال العقل (‘aqlu) unimaginable, inconceivable, unthinkable
صور ṣūr horn, bugle; see also below
صورة ṣūra pl. صور ṣuwar form, shape; pictorial representation, illustration; image, likeness, picture; figure, statue; replica; copy, carbon copy, duplicate; manner, mode; ṣūratan formally │ صورة جامعة total picture, overall picture; صورة متحركة (mutaḥarrika) motion picture, film; المتحركة الصور دار, motion-picture theater, cinema; شمسية صورة (šamsīya) photograph; األصل طبق صورة (ṭibqa l-aṣl) true copy; exact replica (fig.); undistorted picture; مكبرة صورة (mukabbara) enlargement, blowup (phot.); اآلدميين صورة في in human shape; جلية بصورة (jalīya) obviously, evidently; محسوسة بصورة perceptibly, tangibly, palpably; خاصة بصورة (kāṣṣa) especially, particularly; عامة بصورة (‘āmma) generally, in general; مكبرة بصورة (mukabbara) increasingly, on a larger scale, to an increasing degree; بصورة ملحوظة noticeably, markedly; صورة على كيميائية (kīmiyā’īya) chemically, by chemical means; اذا ما صورة في in case
that ..., if; مصغرة صورة في (muṣaggara) on a reduced scale, in miniature
صوري ṣūrī, ṣūwarī formal; superficial; false, sham, deceptive, fallacious; artificial, fictitious, seeming, fancied, imaginary
تصوير taṣwīr drawing, sketching; representation, portrayal, depiction; illustration; painting; photography, also
motion (in take (šamsī); التصوير الشمسي camera آلة التصوير │ taking) picture
تصويرة taṣwīra pl. تصاوير taṣāwīr  pictorial representation, image, picture, illustration
تصور taṣawwur pl. -āt imagination (also philos.), fancy, fantacy, idea; conception, concept (philos.)
تصوري taṣawwurī existing in imagination only, imaginary, fancied, fictitious │ O التصوري الذھب (madhab) idealism (as a philosophical school)
مصور muṣawwir pl. -āt former, shaper, fashioner, creator; painter; photographer; cameraman (motion pictures); draftsman, commercial artist, illustrator │ مصور الكائنات the Creator of the Universe; المصور للقلب الكھربائي (kahrabā’ī, qalb) electrocardiograph
مصورة muṣawwira camera
مصور muṣawwar illustrated; -- (pl. -āt) photographer’s studio; motion-picture studio │ الجغرافيا مصور m. al-jugrāfiyā atlas
 صور ṣūr  Tyre (town in S Lebanon)
 صوص ṣūṣ pl. صيصان ṣīṣān chicken, chick (syr.)
  صوصيṣauṣī (eg.) to peep, cheep, squeak
صوع VII to turn on one’s heel; to obey, yield, give in, submit (ل to s.o. to s.th.)
صاع ṣā‘ pl. اصوع aṣwu‘, اصواع aṣwā‘, صيعان ṣī‘ān saa, a cubic measure of varying magnitude │ صاعا بصاع tit for tat; صاعين الصاع له رد (radda, ṣā‘ain) or to pay
s.o. back
twofold, bring double retaliation on s.o.
صاعة ṣā‘a salon, parlor, reception room
 صوغ) صاغ) ṣāga u (ṣaug, ṣiyāga) to form, shape, mold, fashion, create (ھ s.th.); to formulate (ھ s.th.); to coin (ھ a word); to fabricate, invent, make up (ھ a lie) │ صاغ والفضة الذھب (dahab, fiḍḍa) to work in gold and silver, practice the art of goldsmithing
صوغ ṣaug forming, shaping, molding, fashioning, creating 530
 صيغة sīga forming, shaping, molding, fashioning, creating; -- (pl. صيغ ṣiyag) shape, form; external form; wording, text, version (e.g., of a letter, of a treaty); formula (in general, also math., chem.); jewelry, gold and silver articles; (gram.) form │ الفاعل صيغة the active (gram.); صيغة المفعول the passive (gram.); حاسمة بصيغة in a decided form, in no uncertain terms
صياغة ṣiyāga composing, drafting, wording, forming, formulation, fashioning, molding, shaping; goldsmithery, goldsmithing
مصاغ maṣāg jewelry, jewels, gold and silver articles
ṣāga, صاغة ṣuyyāg, صياغ pl. ṣā’ig صائغ
صواغ ṣuwwāg goldsmith, jeweler
مصوغات maṣūgāt gold and silver jewelry, goldsmithery, jewelry
  صاغ look up alphabetically
wool aṣwāf اصواف pl. ṣūf صوف
صوفي ṣūfī of wool, woolen; Islamic mystic, Sufi
الصوفية life; of way Sufi ṣūfiya صوفية
Sufism (Islamic mysticism)
صوفان ṣūfān tinder, touchwood, punk صوفانة ṣūfāna tinder, touchwood, punk صواف ṣawwāf wool merchant
التصوف at-taṣawwuf Sufism  (Islamic mysticism), the Sufi way of life; mysticism
المتصوفة al-mutaṣawwifa the Sufis, members of Sufi communities, mystics
صوفيا ṣōfiyā Sofia (capital of Bulgaria)
  صول) صال)ṣāla u (ṣaul, صولة ṣaula, صيال ṣiyāl) to spring, jump, leap (على on), attack, assault (على s.o.) II to pan, wash out (ھ grain, gold) III to vie, compete (ھ with s.o.)
صولة ṣaula pl. -āt attack, assault; force, tyranny, despotism, arbitrariness
 صول (Turk. sol) approx.: sergeant major, technical sergeant (Eg.) │ التعليم صول approx.: master sergeant; التعيين صول approx.: quartermaster sergeant (mil.)
صولجان ṣaulajān pl. صوالجة ṣawāllija staff with a curved end; polo mallet; scepter, mace
صوم) صام) ṣāma u (ṣaum, صيام ṣiyām) to abstain (عن from s.th.); to abstain from food, drink, and sexual intercourse; to fast
صوم ṣaum abstention, abstinence, abstemiousness; fasting, fast; الصوم fasting during the month of Ramadan, one of the five principal duties of the Muslim │
الكبير الصوم the Great Fast = Lent (Chr.); الغفران صوم عيد ‘īd ṣ. al-gufrān Yom Kippur, Day of Atonement (Jud.)
صيام ṣiyām fasting, fast
صيامي ṣiyāmī Lenten fare
صائم ṣā’im pl. -ūn, صوم ṣuwwam, صيم ṣuyyam, صيام ṣiyām fasting (adj.); faster, one who fasts
الصومال aṣ-ṣomāl Somaliland
صومالي ṣomalī Somali (adj. and n.)
صمع see ṣauma‘a صومعة
صون) صان) ṣāna I (ṣaun, صيانة ṣiyāna) to preserve, conserve, keep, retain, maintain, sustain, uphold (ھ s.th.); to maintain (ھ e.g., a machine, an automobile); to protect, guard, safeguard, keep, save (عن
ه ھ s.o., s.th. from); to defend (ه ھ، عن s.o., s.th. against) V to uphold one’s honor, live chastely, virtuously (woman); to shut o.s. off; seclude o.s. protect o.s.
صون ṣaun, preservation, conservation, guarding, keeping; susten(ta)tion, upholding; maintenance, upkeep, care; 531 protection, safeguard(ing), securing, defense; chastity, respectability │ صاحبة الصون honorary title or ladies of high social standing
صوان ṣiwān, ṣuwān pl. اصونة aṣwina
cupboard, case
صوان ṣawwan (coll.; n. un. ة) flint; granite
(adawāt) ادوات صوانية ṣawwānī: صواني implements flint
ملك الصيانة │ ṣaun صون = ṣiyāna صيانة
malak aṣ-ṣ. guardian angel (Chr.)
صائن ṣā’in preserver, sustainer, maintainer, keeper, guardian, protector; protective
 مصون maṣūn well-protected, well-kept, guarded, sheltered; chaste, virtuous (woman); also an epithet for women
صوة ṣūwa pl. صوى ṣuwan stone landmark, trail mark
صوى ṣawā i (ṣuwīy) and ṣawiya a (ṣawan) and II to dry up, wither, wilt; -- ṣawā to peep, cheep, squeak, chirp, screech
صوت see صيت
صيح) صاح) ṣāḥa i (ṣaiḥ, صياح ṣiyāḥ) to cry, yell, shout; to scream, screech; to crow; to utter, let out (صيحة ṣaiḥatan a cry); to call out (ب to s.o.), shout, bellow, bawl (في or على at s.o.) II to cry out (loud), roar, bellow, bawl VI to shout at one another, call out to one another; to clamor, raise a din
صيح ṣaiḥ crying, clamor
صيحة ṣaiḥa (n. vic.) pl. -āt cry, outcry, shout │ الحرب صيحة ṣ. al-ḥarb battle cry, war cry; صيحات ارسل (arsala) to utter cries; صيحة صاح to utter a cry; صيحة على within shouting distance; واد في صيحة ذھب (ṣaiḥatan) to die unheard (call)
صياح ṣiyāḥ crying, clamor, cry, outcry; cry of a bird
صياح ṣayyāḥ crier, loud-mouthed person; noisy, clamorous, vociferous, crying
تصايح taṣāyuḥ crying, clamor, roar, bellow(ing)
 صيد) صاد) ṣāda i (ṣaid) to catch (in a trap), trap (ھ game); to hunt (ھ game); to hunt down (ھ game); to catch (ھ fish) V to hunt for prey; to hunt down (s.th.); to catch (ھ s.th.); VIII = I │ الماء في اصطاد العكر (‘akir) to fish in troubled waters
صيد ṣaid hunting, hunt; angling, fishing (also السمك صيد ṣ. as-samak); game, venison, prey, quarry │ خياله صيد من (ṣ. kayālihī) dreamed up by him, a product of his fantasy (of a story)
صياد ṣayyād pl. -āt hunter; fisher │ صياد السمك ṣ. as-samak fisher, fisherman; kingfisher (zool.)
صيداء ṣaidā’ Sidon (city in Lebanon)
مصيدة miṣyada pl. مصايد maṣāyid  trap, snare; net; hunting or fishing implement
maṣāyid  مصايد pl. maṣyada مصيدة
fishery, fishing grounds (also األسماك مصيد)
 صاد ṣād name or the letter ص
صيدلية ṣaidalīya apothecary’s trade; pharmacy, pharmacology
ṣayādila صيادلة pl. ṣaidalī صيدلي
pharmacist, druggist, apothecary
صيدالني ṣaidalānī pharmacist, druggist, apothecary
صيدلية ṣaidalīya pl. -āt pharmacy; drugstore
صيدليات ṣaidalīyāt drugs, pharmaceutics
صير) صار) ṣāra i (ṣair, صيرورة ṣairūra, مصير maṣīr) to become (ھ s.th.); (with foll. imperf.) to begin, commence, start to ..., come to ..., get to ..., get into a situation where ..., get to the point where ...; to set in, occur, happen, come to pass, 532 take place; to fall to s.o.’s (ل) lot, befall (ل s.o.); to betake o.s., come, get (عند or الى to); to arrive (الى at); to end, wind up (الى with), result (الى in); الى به صار to lead, bring s.o. or s.th. to; الى يصار (yuṣāru) one proceeds to ..., one will eventually..., one will wind up with ... II to induce (ه s.o.) to become (ھ s.th.), make (ه ھ s.o. into s.th., out of s.o. s.th.)
صير ṣīr crack (of the door); small salted fish
صيرورة ṣairūra (act or process of) becoming, development; end, outcome, upshot, result
مصير maṣīr development, progress (e.g., of work); -- (pl. مصاير maṣāyir ) place at which one arrives; end, outcome, upshot, issue, result; fate, destiny, lot; life; see also under المصير تقرير │ مصر self- determination (pol.); حي كل مصير m. kull ḥayyin the way of all flesh
تصيير taṣyīr cession, transfer (jur.)
صيصية ṣīṣiya pl. صياص ṣayāṣin spur of the rooster
صوغ see صيغة
صيف) صاف) ṣāfa i (ṣaif) to be summery; to spend the summer, estivate (ھ or ب in) │
 شتا ام الزمان صاف (zamānu am šatā) at all times, under all circumstances II, V, VIII
= I
صيف ṣaif pl. اصياف aṣyāf summer
صيفي ṣaifī summery, estival, summer (adj.) │ صيفي توقيت daylight-saving time
مصيف maṣīf pl. مصايف maṣāyif  summer residence, summer resort; rest center, holiday camp
اصتياف iṣtiyāf summering, summer vacationing
صائفة ṣā’ifa summer(time)
مصطاف muṣṭāf summer resort; (pl. -ūn) vacationist, summer visitor
بالد الصين │ Chinese the China; aṣ-ṣīn الصين
China
صيني Chinese (adj. and n.); porcelain, china
صينية ṣīnīya (syr. ṣēnīya, leb. ṣainīya) pl. صواني ṣawānī a large, round metal plate with raised brim, esp. one made of copper, used as baking tin, serving tray and table top; turntable, متحركة صينية (mutaḥarrika); pl. chinaware, porcelain vessels
صيوان ṣīwān pl. -āt, صواوين ṣawāwīn  (large) tent, pavilion, marquce



ض

ضاد ḍād name of the letter ض; a sound peculiar to Arabic, hence: الضاد اھل ahl aḍ- ḍ. the Arabic-speaking peoples, the Arabs; الضاد ابناء do.; الضاد اقطار the Arabic- speaking countries; الضاد لغة lugat aḍ-ḍ.  the Arabic language
ضؤل ḍa’ula u (ضآلة ḍa’āla, ضؤولة ḍa’ūla) to be small, tiny, little, scanty, meager, slight, sparse, feeble, faint, thin; to diminish, dwindle, wane, decline, shrink, decrease VI = I
ضآلة ḍa’āla (ضئالة ḍi’āla) smallness, littleness, tininess; minuteness, scantiness, meagerness, slightness, sparsity, paucity, feebleness, faintness, thinness; waning,
dwindling, diminution, decrease; shrinking, shrinkage; small number
ḍa’ālah ضآلة = ḍa’ūla ضؤولة
ضئيل ḍa’īl pl. ضئال ḍi’āl, ضؤالء ḍu’alā’  small, tiny, minute, little, scanty, slight, meager, sparse, feeble, faint, thin
ḍa’āla ضآلة = taḍā’ul تضاؤل
ضامة ḍāma checkers
ضأن ḍa’n sheep (coll.)
ضأن ḍa’nī, ḍānī mutton (meat)
ضائن ḍā’in sheep
ضب ḍabba i (ḍabb) to take hold (على of s.th.); to keep under lock, put in safekeeping, guard carefully (على s.th.) II = I; to bolt (ھ the door) IV to be foggy (day)
ضب ḍabb pl. ضباب ḍabāb, اضب aḍubb,
ضبان ḍubbān lizard
ضب ḍabb (eg.) front teeth
ضبة ḍabba pl. -āt, ضباب ḍibāb door bolt, latch; wooden lock
ضباب ḍadāb fog, mist
ضبر ḍabara u to gather, collect, assemble
iḍbāra اضبارة and ḍubāra ḍabāra, ضبارة
pl. اضابر aḍābir  file, dossier
اضبور uḍbūr file, dossier
ضبح ḍabaḥa a (ḍabḥ) to blacken (ھ s.th., said of fire); to snort (horse)
ضبط ḍabaṭa u (ḍabṭ) to grab, grasp, seize, catch, apprehend, arrest, detain (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), take hold (ه ھ، of s.o., of s.th.); to keep, hold, retain (ھ s.th.); to tackle resolutely, master, overcome (ھ s.th.), cope (a with s.th.); to have (ھ s.th.) under control, have command (ھ over s.th.); to restrain, hold back, keep down, subdue, check, curb, control (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to seize, distrain, impound, confiscate (a s.th.); to do (ھ s.th.) accurately, precisely, meticulously, or well; to render precise, define precisely (ھ s.th.); to regulate, adjust (ھ s.th., e.g., techn.); to determine precisely (كلمة kalimatan the spelling and pronunciation of a word), vowel(ize) (ھ a word); to observe strictly, keep exactly (a time); to regulate, settle, put or keep in order (ھ s.th.); to correct (a s.th.); to enter,
 book, record, register (ھ s.th.); to measure off exactly, measure out (ھ s.th.), take exactly the right amount, the right proportion (ھ of) VII to be detained, be held back, be held up; to be regulated, be kept in order, be disciplined; to be determined, be established, etc. (pass. of ḍabaṭa)
ضبط ḍabṭ capture, apprehension, arrest(ing), detention; restraint, suppression, subdual, curb(ing), check(ing); control; seizure, impoundage, distraint, confiscation; accuracy, correctness, exactitude, precision; vowelization; correction, amendment, settlement; regulation, adjustment of an apparatus (techn.); (pl. ضبوط ḍubūṭ) protocol, minutes, procès-verbal; entering, entry, record, registry; ضبطا ḍabṭan accurately, exactly, precisely, punctually
│ ضبطا = بالضبط ḍabṭan; األراضي ضبط ḍ. al- arāḍī cadastral survey; الحسابات ضبط bookkeeping; الشھوة ضبط ḍ. aš-šahwa abstemiousness, continence; األمالك ضبط العقارية (‘aqārīya) cadastral survey; ضبط النفس self-control, self-command; جھاز الضبط jahāz aḍ-ḍ. control apparatus, controlling device;
الضبط عن عار (‘ārin) unvowel(iz)ed ضبطية ḍabṭīya police station; police مضبطة maḍbaṭa pl. مضابط maḍābiṯ 
protocol, minutes, procès-verbal
لجنة االنضباط│ discipline inḍibāṭ انضباط
lajnat al-inḍ disciplinary board
ضابط ḍābiṭ controlling device, control, governor, regulator (techn.); prepositor 534 entrusted with discipline (in Eg. schools); (pl. ضباط ḍubbāṭ) officer; (pl. ضوابط ḍawābiṭ ) general rule, canon, (moral) precept or order │ آمر ضابط senior officer; مأمور ضابط subaltern officer; ضابط الصف ḍ. aṣ-ṣaff pl. الصف ضباط noncommissioned officer; الصوت ضابط ḍābiṭ aṣ-ṣ□aut volume control (radio); ضابط صف ṣaff ḍ. pl. ضباط صف noncommissioned officer; وال ضابط بغير رادع (gair) completely unrestrained, out of all control
ضوابط (pl. police; ḍābiṭa ضابطة
ḍawābiṭ ) curbing force, order
مضبوط maḍbūṭ accurate, exact, correct, right, precise
ضبع ḍab‘, ḍabu‘ f. pl. ضبع ḍibā‘, اضبع aḍbu‘
hyena
ضبن VIII to take under one’s arm
ضبن ḍibn armpit
ضج ḍajja i (ḍajj, ضجيج ḍajīj) to be noisy, boisterous; to clamor, about, raise a hue and cry IV = I
ضجة ḍajja cry, yell, outcry; clamor, noise, din, row, hubbub, tumult
ضجيج ḍajīj cry, yell, outcry; clamor, noise, din, row, hubbub, tumult
ضجوج ḍajūj roaring, bellowing, screaming, crying
ضجاج ḍajjāj violently roaring, bellowing, screaming, crying, boisterous, uproarious
ضجر ḍajira a (ḍajar) to be angry, annoyed, irritated, exasperated (من or ب at, about); to be dissatisfied, discontent, displeased ( من or ب with); to sorrow, be worried, uneasy (من or ب about), be disquieted, grieved, troubled (من or ب by, over) IV to anger, vex, irritate, trouble, torment (ه s.o.), disquiet, discomfit, aggrieve (ه s.o.)
V = I
ضجر ḍajar annoyance, irritation, vexation, anger; dissatisfaction; discontent, displeasure; sorrow, worry, grief
ضجر ḍajir annoyed, irritated, angry, vexed; morose, sullen; dissatisfied, discontent, displeased, uneasy, restless; worried, grieved, troubled
مضجر muḍjir annoying, irritating, exasperating, irksome, tedious
متضجر mutaḍajjir = ضجر ḍajir
ضجع ḍaja‘a a (ḍaj‘, ضجوع ḍujū‘) to lie on one’s side, lie down; to lie, recline, be prostrate; to sleep III to lie, have sexual intercourse (ھا with a woman) VII = I VIII (اضطجع and اضجع aḍja‘a) = I
ضجعة ḍaj‘a (n. vic.) lying position, lying, recumbency; slumber
 ضجع ḍuja‘a, ḍuj‘a late riser, slugabed, sluggard, lazybones; lazy, sluggish, inert
ضجعي ḍuj‘ī late riser, slugabed, sluggard, lazybones; lazy, sluggish, inert
ضجيع ḍajī‘ one sharing the bed; bedfellow; comrade, companion
couch, maḍāji‘ مضاجع pl. maḍja‘ مضجع sleep); (to down lay he اخذ مضجعه │ bed اقض عليه or maḍja‘ahū aqaḍḍa اقض مضجعه to (maḍja‘ahū) اقلق مضجعه or المضجع sleep of s.o. deprive
مضاجع muḍāji‘ bedfellow
مضطجع muḍṭaji‘ couch, bed
ضحضح ḍaḥḍaḥa to vibrate, dicker (mirage); to shatter, break, crush II to vibrate, flicker (mirage)
ضحضاح ḍaḥḍāḥ shallow, shoal, flat (water)
ضحك ḍaḥika a (ḍaḥk, ḍiḥk, ḍaḥik) to laugh (ب or من at, about, over); to jeer, scoff, jibe (ب or على or من at s.o., at s.th.), deride, ridicule, mock, scorn (ب or على or من s.o., s.th.) │ شدقيه بملء ضحك (bi-mil’i 535 šidqaihi) or شدقه ملء ضحك (mil’a) to grin from ear to ear; منضد در عن ضحك (durrin munaḍḍadin) (to laugh by showing stringed pearls, i.e., the teeth), to show a toothy smile; to grin from ear to ear; ذقنه على ضحك (daqanidī; pl. ذقونھم على) (eg. syr.) to fool s.o., make a fool of s.o., pull s.o.’s leg, make fun of s.o., lead s.o. around by the nose (ب with s.th.), put on an act for s.o.; ذقنه في ضحك (daqanihī) to laugh in s.o.,s face II to make (ه s.o.) laugh III to joke, jest, banter (ه with s.o.) IV and X to make (ه s.o.) laugh (من about) │ ما الثكلى يضحك (taklā) (that which makes a woman who has lost her child laugh =) irresistibly comical VI to laugh
ضحك ḍaḥk, ḍiḥk, ḍaḥik laugh(ing); laughter
ضحكة ḍaḥka (n. vic.) pl. -āt laugh
ضحكة ḍuḥka object of ridicule, laughingstock
ضحوك ḍaḥuk frequently, or constantly, laughing; laugher
ضحاك ḍaḥḥāk frequently, or constantly, laughing; laugher; joker, jester, wag, buffoon
اضحوكة uḍḥūka pl. اضاحك aḍāhik  object of ridicule, laughingstock; lark, spree, hoax, practical joke
اضحك aḍḥak  more ridiculous, more laughable, more ludicrous, funnier, more comical
مضحكة maḍḥaka object of ridicule, laughingstock
ضاحك ḍāḥik pl. ضواحك ḍawāḥik  laughing │ السن ضاحك ḍ. as-sinn cheerful, gay, sunny
مضحك muḍḥik ridiculous, laughable, ludicrous, droll, funny, comical; comedian, buffoon, jester │ تمثيلية قصة مضحكة (qiṣṣa tamtīlīya) comedy
ضحل ḍaḥl shallow, shoal, flat; a shallow, a shoal
ضحى) and ضحا (ضحو ḍaḥā u (ḍaḥw, ḍuḥuw) to become visible, appear; -- ضحى ḍaḥiya a ( ضحى ḍaḥlan) to become visible, appear; to be struck by the sun’s rays II to sacrifice, offer up, immolate (ب s.th.) │ بنفسه ضحى to sacrifice o.s.; والنفس بالنفس ضحى to sacrifice life and property (properly: the soul and that which is precious) IV to be, become; with foll. imperf.: to begin, start, commence, or set about to (do s.th.); to come to ..., get to ..., get to the point where ..., get into a situation where ...
ضحوة ḍaḥwa pl. ḍaḥawāt forenoon; morning
ضحى ḍuḥan (m. and f.) forenoon │ بين وضحاھا عشية (‘asīyatin wa-ḍuḥāhā) over night, from one day to the next, all of a sudden
ضحية ḍaḥīya forenoon; -- (pl. ضحايا ḍaḥāyā) slaughter animal, blood sacrifice, immolation; victim │ ضحيته وقع or ذھب (ḍaḥīyatahū) to fall victim to, become a victim of s.th. or s.o.
اضحى aḍḥan (coll.; n. un. اضحاة aḍḥāh) slaughter animal, blood sacrifice, immolation │ األضحى عيد ‘īd al-a. the Feast of Immolation, or Greater Bairam, on the 10  of Zu’lhijja; األضحى يوم yaum
 al-a. the Day of Immolation, i.e., the 10  of Zu’lhijja
اضحية uḍḥīya pl. اضاحى aḍāhīy  slaughter animal, blood sacrifice, immolation
تضحية taḍḥiya sacrificing, immolation; (pl. -āt) sacrifice
sunlit ضاح الشمس ḍāḥin: ضاح
ضاحية ḍāḥiya pl. ضواح ḍawāḥin surroundings, vicinity, outskirts; suburb
مضحى muḍaḥḥan place where one has breakfast 536
ضخ ḍakka u (ḍakk) to spurt, spout, squirt (ھ water)
spray(er); squirt, -āt pl. miḍakka مضخة suction (jaḍḍāba) مضخة جذابة │ pump engine; fire )مضخة الحرائق )الحريق pump; pump suction مضخة رافعة
ضخم ḍakuma u (ضخم ḍakāma) to be or become big, large, bulky, heavy, gross, voluminous II to inflate, blow up (ھ s.th.) V to swell, become inflated; to expand, distend
ضخم ḍakm pl. ḍikām big, large, sizable, great (also of a name, of prestige); bulky, gross; heavy, voluminous, huge, vast, ample, colossal; stout, corpulent, plump, buxom; magnificent, splendid, gorgeous, luxurious, pompous │ الضخمة المدفعية (midfa‘īya) heavy artillery
ضخامة ḍakāma bigness, largeness, greatness; bulkiness, grossness; heaviness; volume, voluminosity; stoutness, plumpness, corpulence, obesity; pomp, splendor
تضخيم taḍkīm inflating
ضخم taḍakkum inflation; swelling, expansion, dilation, distention; (monetary) inflation, also (مالي تضخم (نقدي (naqdī) │ الطحال تضخم distention of the spleen (med.)
مضخم muḍakkim pl. -āt amplifier │ الصوت مضخم m. aṣ-ṣaut loud-speaker
ضد III to be contrary, opposed, contrasting, antagonistic, inverse; to act, set o.s. (ه ھ، against), antagonize (ه s.o.), contravene, violate (ھ s.th.), be opposed (ه ھ، to), be contradictory (ھ to s.th.), act contrary to
s.o. or s.th. (ه ھ،) VI to be opposed to each other, be contradictory, contradict one another
ضد ḍidd pl. اضداد aḍdād an opposite, a contrary, contrast; word with two opposite meanings; adversary, opponent; antitoxin, antidote, anti- (in compounds); ضدة ḍidda (prep.) against │ الضد على كان to do or think the opposite, take an opposite stand
ضدية ḍiddiīya contrariness, oppositeness, opposition; enmity, hostility, animosity
مضادة muḍādda contrast, opposite, contradiction
تضاد taḍādd contrast, opposite, contradiction
مضاد muḍādd opposed, opposite, contrary, counter-, contra-, anti- (in compounds); pl. مضادات antidotes │ للحبل مضادات (ḥabal) contraceptives; حشرية مضادات (ḥašarīya) insecticides; للفساد مضادات (li-l-fasād) antiseptics
متضاد mutaḍādd contrary, opposite
ضر ḍarra u (ḍarr) to harm, impair, prejudice, damage, hurt, injure (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), do harm, be harmful, noxious or injurious (ھ، ه to s.o., to s.th.) II to damage, harm, prejudice III = I; IV = │ (ب or ه ھ،); to force, compel, coerce, oblige (على ه s.o. to); to do violence (ه to s.o.), bring pressure to bear (ه on); to add a second wife to one'. household V to be damaged, harmed, impaired, prejudiced, hurt, or injured; to suffer damage or loss; to complain (من of, about) VII to be damaged, harmed, impaired, prejudiced, hurt, or injured; to suffer damage or loss VIII to force, compel, coerce, oblige (ه s.o., الى to); -- pass. uḍṭurra to be forced, compelled, obliged (الى to); to be in an emergency or predicament, be hard pressed; to be in need (الى of s.th.) need, want (الى s.th.)
ضر ḍurr, ḍarr damage, harm, impairment, prejudice, detriment, injury, hurt; loss, disadvantage
ضر ḍirr, ḍurr addition of a second wife to one’s household 537
 ضرة ḍarra pl. -āt, ضرائر ḍarā’ir  wife other than the first of a plural marriage;
udder
ضرر ḍarar pl. اضرار aḍrār harm, damage, detriment; loss, disadvantage │ ما الضرر what does it matter? what’s the harm of it? الضررين اخف akaff aḍ-ḍ the lesser of the two evils
ضراء ḍarrā’ distress, adversity │ في والضراء السراء (sarrā’) in good and bad days, for better or for worse
ضرير ḍarīr blind
ضرورة ḍarūra pl. -āt necessity, stress, constraint, need; distress, plight, emergency, want, austerity; ḍarūratan necessarily │ بالضرورة necessarily; عند الضرورة in case of need, if need. be, when necessary; القصوى للضرورة (quṣwā) in case of dire necessity, if worst comes to worst; احكام للضرورة and المحظورات تبيح الضرورة (tubīḥu) necessity knows no laws
ضروري ḍarūrī necessary, imperative, requisite, indispensable, inevitable; pl. ضروريات ḍarūrīyāt necessaries, necessities
necessary; be to كان من الضروري │
الحياة ضروريات ḍ. al-ḥayāh necessities of life; األحوال ضروريات exigencies, requirements of the situation
مضرة maḍarra pl. -āt, مضار maḍārr  harm, damage, detriment, loss, disadvantage على for)
اضطرار iḍtirār compulsion, coercion; necessity, exigency, requirement; plight, predicament, emergency │ االضطرار عند in case of emergency
اضطرارى iḍṭirārī coercive, compulsory, inevitable, necessary, obligatory
ضار ḍārr harmful, injurious, detrimental, noxious, disadvantageous
مضر muḍirr harmful, injurious, detrimental, noxious, disadvantageous (ب to, for)
مضطر muḍṭarr forced, compelled, obliged (الى to); poor, destitute; wanting ( الى s.th.), in need (الى of s.th.)
ضرب ḍaraba i (ḍarb) to boat, strike, hit (ه s.o., ھ s.th., ب with; ب على with s.th. on; ه على s.o. on); to shoot, fire (ه ھ، at s.o., at
s.th.), shell, bombard (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to play (على ھ، a musical instrument); to make music; to type (on a typewriter); to sting (scorpion); to separate, part (بين people); to impose (على ھ on s.o. s.th.);
عن ضرب to turn away from, leave, forsake, abandon, avoid, or shun s.o. or s.th.; -- (ḍarb, ضربان ḍarabān) to pulsate, palpitate, throb, boat (vein, heart); to ache (violently), hurt (wound, tooth); to move, stir; to rove, roam about, travel (في in, through), loiter, stroll (in streets); to cruise (ship); to migrate (bird); to incline (الى to a color), shade (الى into a color); -- (ضراب ḍirāb) to cover, mount (ھا the camel mare)
│ اجال له ضرب (ajalan) to fix a date for s.o.; األرز ضرب (aruzza) to hull rice; ضرب األرض في (arḍ) to travel; على بوية ضرب (bōya) to paint or daub s.th.; الباب ضرب to knock on the door; الجرس ضرب (jaras) to ring the bell; حقنا ضرب (ḥaqnan) to administer a syringe, give an injection; خطا ضرب (kaṭṭan) to draw a line; ضرب ألسداس أخماسا (li-asdāsin) and اخماسه ضرب اسداسه في to brood, rack one’s brain in order to find a way out; to be at one’s wit’s end; to intrigue, scheme; to build air castles; to daydream; خيمة ضرب (kaimatan) to pitch a tent; القياسي الرقم ضرب (raqma, qiyāsīya) to break a record; ضرب السالم (salām) to give a military salute; ضريبة ضرب to impose a tax (على on s.o.); في اطنابه ضرب (aṭnābahū) to take root, prevail (at a place); على اطنابه ضرب to settle down, take up permanent residence in a place; طوبا ضرب (ṭūban) to make brick; آخر في عددا ضرب (‘adadan fī ākara) to multiply a number 538 by another;
عنقه ضرب ‘unuqahū) to behead, decapitate s.o., have s.o.’s head cut off; قالبه ضرب (qāllabahū) to imitate s.th.; كفا ضرب (kaffan) to slap s.o.’s face; ل مثال ضرب (matalan) to apply a proverb to; له ضرب مثال (matalan) to give s.o. an example, point out a model for s.o.; مثال ضرب to give an example; to quote as an example ( ل ھ or على ب s.th. for); األمثال ضرب to impart words of wisdom, point out morals; نقودا ضرب to mint money; ضرب موعدا (mau‘idan) to agree on time or place of a meeting, make an appointment; ضرب الصفرة الى) الحمرة الى) (ḥumra, ṣafra) to shade into red (into yellow); األرض به ضرب
 (arḍ) to throw s.o. or s.th. to the ground; الخيال في ضرب (kayāl) to be in the clouds, be unrealistic; to want the impossible; صدره على برأسه ضرب (bi-ra’sihī ‘alā ṣadrihī) to let one’s head sink to the chest; في مصيب بسھم ضرب (bi-sahmin muṣībin) to take an active part in; في ونصيب بسھم ضرب (wa-naṣībin) to participate in, share s.th.; بعرق فيه ضرب (bi-‘irq) do.; عرض به ضرب الحائط (‘urda l-ḥ.) not to give a hoot for s.th.; to disdain, despise, reject s.th.; to throw s.th. overboard, jettison s.th.; ضرب الى بنظره (naẓarihī) to turn one’s glance to; صاحبه بوجه ضرب (bi-wajhihī ṣāḥibihī) to boomerang, fall back on the originator; كلمة على ضرب (kalima) to efface, strike, or erase, a word; صفحا عنه ضرب (ṣafḥan) to turn away s.o. or s.th.; to disregard, ignore
s.o. or s.th., pay no attention to, pass over
s.o. or s.th.; بريد حديد في ضرب to take futile steps; to beat the air; ايام سبعة لنفسه ضرب (sab’ata ayyamin) he decided to stay seven days; األيام وبينه بين ضرب (ayyām) fate separated me from him,
drew us apart II to mix, blend (ب ھ s.th. with); to sow dissension, cause trouble (بين among); to quilt (ھ a fabric) III to contend, vie, fight (ھ with s.o.); to speculate IV to turn away (عن from), leave, abandon, forsake, desert, avoid, shun (عن s.o., s.th.); to remain, stay, abide (في in) │ ل جأشا اضرب (ja’šan) to be prepared for s.th., make up one’s mind to take s.th. upon o.s.; عن صفحا اضرب (ṣafḥan) to desist, abstain from; عن اضرب العمل (‘amal) to stop work, to strike; اضرب الطعام عن (ṭa‘ām) to go, on a hunger strike VI to come to blows, brawl, fight, strike one another; to be divided, differ, conflict, clash, be contradictory (opinions, and the like) VIII to clash, surge, lap (waves); to be set, or get, into a state of unrest, turmoil, excitement, commotion, tumult, agitation, be or become agitated, troubled; to be in a lively stir, move about, bustle, hustle, romp; to sway, reel, waver; to be or become disturbed, unsettled, disorganized, disarranged, disordered, confused, entangled, upset, restless, uneasy, or anxious; to tremble, shake
ضرب ḍarb beating, striking, hitting, rapping; shooting, shelling, gunning,
bombing, bombardment; multiplication; coining, formation; minting (of money); -- (pl. ضروب ḍurūb) kind, sort, specimen, species, variety; last foot of the second hemistich; (pl. اضراب aḍrāb) similar, like
│ ضربخانة and الضرب دار (money) mint; الرمل ضرب ḍ. ar-raml geomancy; النار ضرب shooting, tiring, shelling, gunning, bombardment; الضرب تحت السالح وضع to level a weapon, bold a weapon ready to fire; واضرابه ھو he and the likes of him
ضربة ḍarba (n. vic.) pl. ḍarabāt blow, knock, punch; thrust, push, jolt, shock; stroke, lash; shot; plague, affliction, trial, tribulation, punishment │ الشمس ضربة ḍ. aš-šams sunstroke, heatstroke; قاضية ضربة (qāḍiya) fatal blow, deathblow (على for); جزاء ضربة ḍ. jazā’ penalty kick (in soccer) 539
ضراب ḍirāb copulation (of a female animal)
ضريب ḍarīb beaten, struck, smitten, bit; similar, like │ فالن للشيخ ضريب one of the caliber of Sheik So-and-So
ضريبة ḍarība pl. ضرائب ḍarāib  imposition, impost; levy, tax, duty; character, nature │ الدخل ضريبة ḍ. ad-dakl income tax; العمل كسب ضريبة ḍ. kasb
al-‘amal wage tax; المالھى ضريبة ḍ. al- malāhī admission tax, entertainment tax
مضرب maḍrib pl. مضارب madārib  camp site; camp; place, spot, locality; way, path; large tent, marquee │ كان األمثال) المثل مضرب) (m. al-maṭal) to be proverbial, be exemplary, be unique, be cited as an example; ارز مضارب m. aruzz rice-hulling facilities
مضرب miḍrab pl. مضارب maḍārib  large tent, marquee, pavilion; bat, mallet; racket (tennis, etc.); whisk, beater (e.g., for eggs); swatter, flyswatter; piano
مضراب miḍrāb bat, mallet, racket (ball games, tennis)
مضاربة muḍāraba pl. -āt speculation (stock exchange); silent partnership (Isl. Law), limited partnership, partnership in commendam
اضراب iḍrāb pl. -āt strike
 تضارب taḍārub opposition, contradiction, inconsistency, discrepancy, incompatibility, conflict, clash (of opinions, and the like)
ضرب idṭirāb pl. -āt disturbance, disorder, disarray; confusion, muddle, perturbation; disorganization, disruption, upset, derangement; trouble, commotion, unrest, riot (also pol.); restlessness, restiveness │ عصبية اضطرابات (‘aṣabīya) nervous disorders
ضوارب ḍawārib  pl. of ضارب ḍārib besting, striking, etc. │ الضوارب العروق the arteries; ضوارب طير (ṭair) migratory birds
مضروب maḍrūb appointed, agreed upon, fixed, determined (time, date, place); multiplicand (math.) │ فيه مضروب multiplier (math.)
مضربة muḍarraba quilt, comforter مضارب muḍārib pl. -ūn speculator متضارب mutaḍārib conflicting,
irreconcilable, incompatible, divided (opinions, and the like); contradictory, discrepant, inconsistent
مضطرب muḍṭarib disturbed, disordered, disarrayed, unsettled; confused, muddled, perturbed; upset, disrupted, disorganized, deranged; uneasy, restive, agitated, excited, anxious; weak, insufficiently supported (tradition)
مضطرب muḍtarab playground (fig.)
ḍarb ضرب see ضربخان
ضرج ḍaraja u (ḍarj) to spot, stain, befleck, smear (بالدم ھ s.th. with blood) II = I V to redden, be or become red
مضرج muḍaraj: اليدين مضرج m. al- yadain with bloodstained hands; (caught) red-handed, in the act
aḍriḥa اضرحة darā’iḥ , ضرائح pl. ḍarīḥ ضريح
grave, tomb; mausoleum
ضرس ḍarasa i (ḍars) to bite firmly or fiercely (ھ s.th.); -- darisa a (daras) to be dull ( األسنان the teeth from acid food and drink)
ضرس ḍirs pl. اضراس aḍrās, ضروس ḍurūs molar tooth │ العقل ضرس ḍ. al-‘aql wisdom tooth 540
ضروس حرب ḥarb ḍarūs fierce, murderous war
تضاريس taḍārīs : األرض تضاريس t. al-arḍ elevations, undulations of the ground; الوجه تضاريس t. al-wajh wrinkles of the face
ضرط ḍaraṭ i (ḍarṭ, ضريط ḍarīṭ, ضراط ḍurāṭ) to break wind
ضرط ḍarṭ (n. un ة) wind, fart
ضراط ḍurāṭ wind, fart
ضرع ḍara‘a a, ḍaru‘a u (ضرعة ḍarā‘a) and ḍarā‘a a (ḍarā‘a) to be humble, submissive (الى toward s.o.), humiliate o.s., abase o.s. (الى before); to implore, beg, beseech, entreat (الى s.o.) III to be similar, be equal (ه ھ، to s.o., to s.th.), be like s.o. or s.th. (ه ھ،), resemble (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) V and VIII to humiliate o.s., abase
o.s. (الى before); to implore, beg, beseech, entreat (الى s.o.)
ضرع ḍar‘ pl. ضروع ḍurū‘, ضراع ḍirā‘ udder, teat │ والضرع الزرع (zar‘) agriculture and stock farming
ضرع ḍir‘ like, alike, similar
ضراعة ḍarā‘a submissiveness, humbleness; imploring, begging, entreaty, supplication
مضارعة muḍāra‘a likeness, similarity, resemblance
تضرع taḍarru‘ imploring, begging, entreaty, supplication
ضارع ḍāri‘ frail (of a person)
مضارع muḍāri‘ like, alike, similar; (gram.) imperfect
ضرغم ḍargam pl. ضراغم ḍarāgim  lion
lion ḍarāgima ضراغمة pl. ḍirgām ضرغام
ضرم ḍarama a (ḍaram) to catch fire, be on fire, burn, flare, blaze; to break out, flare up (war) II to kindle, light (ھ fire) │ ضرم في النار to set s.th. on fire, set fire to s.th. IV = II; V to burn, flare, flame, be ablaze (also of emotions, of passion) VIII = I
ضرام ḍirām burning, blaze, flare; fire, conflagration
اضطرام iḍṭirām burning, flare, blaze; fire, conflagration
 مضطرم muḍṭarim burning, flaming, on fire
ضرو II to set (ب ھ a dog on game); to provoke (ه s.o.) to a fight (ب with)
ḍirā’ ضراء aḍrin, اضر pl. ḍirw ضرو
hound, hunting dog
ضراوة ḍarāwa greed, voracity
ضار ḍārin voracious, ferocious, savage, rapacious; (pl. ضوار ḍawārin) beast of prey, predatory animal
ضعضع ḍa‘ḍa‘a to tear down, demolish, raze, ruin, undermine, weaken (ھ s.th.) II taḍa‘ḍa‘a to decline, decay, become dilapidated, perish; to become weak or weaker, wane; to dissolve, fall apart (organization)
ضعضعة ḍa‘ḍa‘a demolition, razing; sapping, undermining; debility, frailty, feebleness │ الكبر ضعضعة ḍ. al-kibar senility, dotage
متضعضع mutaḍa‘ḍi‘ dilapidated, decayed; weakened, debilitated; weak, frail, feeble; submissive, humble
ضعف ḍa‘ufa u (ḍu‘f) to be or become weak, weakly, feeble, frail, delicate, debilitated, impotent, languid, flabby, or slack; to become weaker, wane, decrease, diminish, abate, be attenuated; to be too weak (عن for s.th.) IV to weaken, enfeeble, debilitate (من or ه ,ھ s.o., s.th.) X to deem (ه s.o.) weak; to behave arrogantly (ه toward s.o.) 541
ضعف ḍ‘uf, ḍa‘f weakness, feebleness, frailty; weakening, enfeeblement, debilitation │ اإلرادة ضعف weakness of will; العصبي الضعف (‘aṣabī) neurasthenia, nervous debility; التناسل ضعف ḍ. at-tanāsul sexual impotence
ضعيف ḍa‘īf pl. m. ضعفاء ḍu‘afā’ , ضعاف ḍi‘āf, ضعفة ḍa‘afa, pl. f. ضعائف ḍa‘ā’if  weak, feeble; frail, weakly, delicate,
debilitated, impotent, languid, flabby, slack; deficient (as a school-report mark)
│ اإلرادة ضعيف weak-willed; العقل ضعيف ḍ. al-‘aql dim-witted, feeble-minded; ضعيف القلب ḍ. al-qalb weak-spirited, pusillanimous, meek, faint-hearted, despondent, cowardly; الضعيف ھذا my own
insignificant self, I (as an expression of modesty)
اضعاف iḍ‘āf weakening, enfeeblement, debilitation; impairment
مستضعف mustaḍ‘af deemed weak; weak; oppressed, miserable
  ضعف II to double, redouble (ھ s.th.); to multiply, compound (ھ s.th.) III do. (من or ھ s.th.) VI to be doubled, be compounded, be multiplied
ضعف pl. ḍi‘f pl. اضعاف aḍ‘āf double, that which is twice as much; a multiple, that which is several times as much, (after numerals) -fold; fold of a garment; pl. interstice, space │ ضعفه مئة mi’atu ḍi‘fihī a hundred times as much, the hundredfold of it; اضعافه ثالثة talātatu aḍ‘āfihī thrice as much, the threefold of it; اضعافه اضعاف a. aḍ‘āfihī many times as much, e.g. ھذا فاق اضعافه اضعاف مرتبه المبلغ )mablagu murattabahū aḍ‘āfa a.) this amount was many times as much as his salary; اضعافا مضاعفة aḍ‘āfan muḍā‘afatan many times, a hundred-fold
تضاعيف taḍā‘īf  contents, text (of a piece of writing); folds; space between the lines; (as an expletive after تضاعيفه في (في within it, therein contained
مضاعفة muḍā‘afa doubling, compounding, multiplying; pl. -āt complications (of a disease)
تضاعف taḍā‘uf doubling, multiplying
مضعف muḍa‘‘af twofold, double; multiplied, compounded, increased many times
مضاعف muḍā‘af twofold, double; multiplied, compounded, increased many times; see also ḍi‘f
ضعة ḍa‘a, ḍi‘a see وضع
ضغث ḍagata a (ḍagt) to confuse, muddle, mix up (ھ a story)
ضغث lIiM pl. اضغاث aḍgāt bunch, bouquet; mixture, muddle, jumble, maze
زاد ضغثا dreams; confused اضغاث األحالم │ worse thing a make to (ibāla) على ابالة
ضغط ḍagaṭa a (ḍagṭ) to press, squeeze (ه ,ھ s.o., s.th.); to compress (ھ air); to exert pressure (على on); to oppress, suppress (
 على s.o., s.th.), beer down heavily (على upon) VII to be pressed, be squeezed, be compressed
ضغط ḍagṭ pressure; emphasis, stress; oppression, suppression; voltage, tension (el.) │ الجوي الضغط (jawwī) atmospheric pressure; الدم ضغط ḍ. ad-dam and الضغط الدموي (damawī) blood pressure; الھواء ضغط ḍ. al-hawā’ air pressure; الرأي ضغط تحت العام (ḍ. ar-ra’y al-‘āmm) under the pressure of public opinion
ضغطة ḍagṭa (n. vic.) pressure
O ضغوطية ḍugūṭīya (wind) pressure
ضاغوط ḍāgūṭ nightmare
مضاغط ھوائية madāgiṭ : مضاغط O
(hawā’īya) compressors
تضاغط taḍāguṭ compression (phys.; as opposed to تخلخل takalkul) 542
compressibility inḍigāṭ انضغاط compressor آلة ضاغطة ḍāgiṭ: ضاغط (hawā’) ھواء مضغوط madgūṭ: مضغوط
compressed air
ضغن ḍagina a (ḍagan) to bear a grudge, harbor (secret) hatred (على against), recent (على s.o.) VI to harbor a grudge against one another
ضغن ḍ□ign pl. اضغان aḍgān rancor, spite, grudge, malice, malevolence, ill will, (secret) hatred
ضغن ḍagin malicious, malevolent, rancorous, spiteful, resentful
ضغينة ḍagīna pl. ضغائن ḍagā’in  rancor, spite, grudge, malice, malevolence, ill- will, (secret) hatred
ضفة ḍiffa crowd, throng, jam (of people)
ضفة ḍiffa, ḍaffa pl. ضفاف ḍifāf bank, share; coast
ضفف ḍafaf poverty, destitution
ضفدع ḍifdi‘, ḍafda‘ pl. ضفادع ḍafādi‘  frog │ O
بشري ضفدع (bašarī) frogman (mil.)
ضفر ḍafara i (ḍafr) to braid, plait (ھ hair), interweave, interlace, intertwine (ھ s.th.); to twine (ھ a rope) II = I; III to help, assist, aid (ه s.o.) VI to help one another ( على to do s.th.); to be tightly interwoven,
be tied up, be closely connected (مع with); to be connected (evidence)
ضفر ḍafr pl. ضفور ḍufūr (saddle) girth ضفار ḍafār pl. ضفر ḍufur (saddle) girth ضفيرة ḍafīra pl. اضفار ḍafā’ir  plait;
braid, tress, pigtail; plaitwork, wicker- work; galloon, lace; strand, hank, skein; plexus (anat.)
ضفو) ضفا) dafā u (ḍafw) to be abundant, copious; to flow over IV to allot generouely (ھ على s.th. to); to grant, award (ھ على s.th. to); to let s.o. or s.th. (على) have (ھ s.th.); to fill (على ھ s.th. with); to wrap, envelope (على s.th., ھ with), spread (ھ على s.th. over)
ضفوة ḍafwa: العيش ضفوة ḍ. al-‘aiš an easy, comfortable life
ضاف ḍāfin abundant, copious, ample; detailed, elaborate, extensive
ضل ḍalla i (ضالل ḍalāl, ضاللة ḍalāla) to lose one’s way, go astray; to stray (عن or ھ from the way); to err │ سعيه ضل (sa‘yuhū) his effort was in vain II to mislead, lead astray, misguide (ه s.o.); to delude, deceive (ه s.o.) │ نفسه ضل to delude o.s. IV
= II; to make (ه s.o.) lose his way (ھ); to let (ھ) s.th. get lost
ضل ḍull error
ضالل ḍalāl a straying from the right path or from truth; error │ O األلوان ضالل color blindness, dichromatism
ضاللة ḍalāla error
error aḍālīl  اضاليل pl. uḍlūla اضلولة
مضلة maḍalla occasion, or possibility, of going astray
تضليل taḍlīl misleading, misguidance, delusion, deception
اضالل iḍlāl misleading, misguidance, delusion, deception
ضال ḍāll pl. ضوال ḍawāll straying, roaming, wandering; astray, lost; erroneous, false
ضالة ḍālla goal of persistent search, object of a long-cherished wish │ ضالة منشودة do.
 مضلل muḍallil misleading, misguiding, deceptive, delusive, fallacious
مضل muḍill misleading, misguiding, deceptive, delusive, fallacious
ضلع ḍala‘a a (ḍal‘) with مع: to aide with s.o., make common cause with s.o.; -- ḍalu‘a u (ضالعة ḍalā‘a) to be otrong, sturdy, 543 robust; -- ḍalī‘a a (ḍala‘) to be crooked, bent, curved, to curve II to crook, bend, curve (ھ s.th.) V to be jammed, crammed (من with); to be versed, skilled, proficient, knowledgeable (من in), be conversant, be thoroughly familiar or acquainted (من with), be at home (من in a field of knowledge) VIII to be versed, skilled, proficient (ب in), be thoroughly familiar or acquainted, be conversant (ب with); to assume, take over, take upon o.s. (ب s.th., a task, financial expenses, a job, and the like) X to be versed, skilled, proficient (من in), be thoroughly familiar or acquainted, be conversant (من with)
ضلع ḍal‘ affection, attachment │ ضلعه معه he sympathized with him, he is on his aide
ضلع ḍil‘, ḍilā‘ pl. ضلوع ḍulū‘, اضالع aḍlā‘, اضلع aḍlu‘ rib; cutlet, chop; side (of a triangle); األضالع the chest, the breast │ البرميل ضلع ḍ. al-birmīl barrel stave; متساوى األضالع mutasāwī l-a. equilateral (geom.); األمر في ضلع له كان he had s.th. to do with the matter, he had a hand in it, he played a role in the affair
ضليع ḍalī‘ strong, sturdy; knowledgeable, experienced, skilled
ضالعة ḍalā‘a strength, sturdiness, robustness (of the body)
مضلع muḍalla‘ ribbed; polygonal; (pl.
-āt polygon │ مضلع صاج corrugated iron
متضلع mutaḍalli‘ versed, skilled, proficient (من in), thoroughly familiar, conversant (من with); expert (من in)
ضلمه (Turk. dolma) ḍolma stuffed food (e.g., eggplants stuffed with meat and rice)
ضم ḍamma u (ḍamm) to bring together, join, draw together, contract (ھ s.th.); to add (up), sum up (ھ s.th.); to gather, collect, reap, harvest (ھ s.th.); to unite, bring
together (ھم persons); to embrace, hug (ه s.o.); to join, subjoin, annex (ھ الى s.th. to), add, attach (ه ,ھ الى s.o., s.th. to), unite (ه ,ھ الى s.o. , s.th. with); to combine (within o.s. different things); to close, compress (ھ the lips); to grasp, grip, grab, seize (على s.o., s.th.); to get (ه s.o.) into a predicament (said of fate); to pronounce with the vowel u (ھ a consonant; gram.) │ الصفوف ضم to close the ranks; صدره الى ضمه (ṣadrihī) to press s.o. to one’s bosom, embrace s.o.; زوجته اليه ضم (zaujatahū) he embraced his wife VI to unite, rally, join forces VII to close, draw or crowd together, be closely packed; to be joined, united, or combined (الى with), unite, join forces (الى with); to be added, be annexed (الى to); to associate, affiliate (الى with); to enter, join (الى an organization, and the like); to comprise, include, encompass, embrace, contain (على s.th.)
ضم ḍamm addition, subjunction; gathering, collecting, rallying, joining, uniting, amalgamation, fusion; admission, enrollment; the vowel u (gram.)
ضم ḍamma the vowel point for u; (pl.
-āt) embrace, hug
ضميمة ḍamīma pl. ضمائم ḍamā’im  addition, supplement; increase, raise (of salary)
تضام taḍāmm: مع تضاما together with, jointly with
انضمام inḍimām annexation (الى to), joining (الى of), union, association, affiliation (الى with); entry, enrollment (الى into an organization, and the like), accession (الى to)
مضموم maḍmūm closed, tight, compressed (mouth)
order close نظام منضم munḍamm: منضم (mil.)
O منضمة munḍamma accessory, attachment (techn.) 544
اضمحل iḍmiḥlāl to disappear, vanish, dwindle, fade away, molt away; to decrease, become less
اضمحالل iḍmiḥlāl disappearance, vanishing, evanescence; fading
 مضمحل muḍmaḥill vanishing, evanescent, fading; damped (oscillations, waves; phys.)
ضمخ ḍamaka u (ḍamk) and II to oil, anoint, rub, perfume (ه ,ب ھ s.o., s.th. with)
ضمد ḍamada u i (ḍamd, ضماد ḍimād) and II to dress, bandage (ھ s.th., esp. a wound)
ضماد ḍimād bandaging (of a wound); bandage, band, ligature; carrying on of several love affairs (of a woman)
ضمادة ḍimāda dressing (of a wound), bandage
مضمد muḍammid (ir.) male nurse
مضمدة muḍammida o compress; (ir.) nurse
ضمر ḍamara, ḍamura u (ḍumr, ضمور ḍumūr) to be or become lean, emaciated, skinny, thin, slim, slander; to contract, shrink II to emaciate, make lean, thin, or slender (ھ s.th.) IV = II; to secrete, conceal, hide, keep secret (نفسه في ھ s.th. in one’s heart), keep (ھ s.th.) to o.s. (في نفسه); to harbor, entertain (ل ھ a feeling toward, against) │الشر له اضمر (šarra) to boar s.o. a grudge, harbor ill will against
s.o. V to become lean, emaciated VII to dry up, wither, wilt, shrivel
ضمر ḍumr emaciation; leanness, skinniness, thinness, slenderness, slimness
ضمور ḍumūr emaciation; loanness, skinniness, thinness, slenderness, slimness; atrophy (med.)
ضمار ḍimār: ضمار دين (ḍain) bad debt (i.e., a debt deemed uncollectible)
ضمير ḍamīr pl. ضمائر ḍamā’ir  heart; mind; innermost; conscience; (independent or suffixed) personal pronoun (gram.) │ الضمير تأنيث compunctions, contrition, repentance; حي الضمير ḥayy aḍ-ḍ. conscientious, scrupulous; الضمير مرتاح murtāḥ aḍ-ḍ. of peaceful mind; الضمير فاقد unscrupulous
مضمار miḍmār pl. مضامير maḍāmīr  race course, race track; arena; field of activity, field, domain
اضمار iḍmār concealment (of a thought), mental reservation; ellipsis (rhet.)
ضامر ḍāmir loan, skinny, thin; slander, slim, svelte
مضمر muḍmar secret, hidden, covert; (independent or suffixed) personal pronoun, also مضمر اسم (ism; gram.)
ضمن ḍamina a (ضمان ḍamān) to be or become responsible or liable, be guaranty, give security or guaranty, vouch (ب or ھ for), warrant, ensure, safeguard, guarantee (ل ھ to s.o. s.th.); to insure (ھ من s.th. against) │ شيئا لنفسه ضمن to be absolutely certain of s.th. II to have (ھ s.th.) insured ( من against); to insert, include, enclose (ھ ھ s.th. in s.th. else) V to comprise, include, comprehend, imply, embrace, contain (ھ s.th.) VI to be jointly liable, have joint responsibility (ھ for s.th.); to be solidary, be in accord, stick together
ضمن ḍimn inside, interior; ḍimna (prep.) in, within, inside of, among; ضمنا ḍimnan (adv.) inclusively, implicitly, tacitly │ ضمنا مفھوم tacitly comprised, implicit; ضمن من min ḍimni (with foll. genit.) included in, implied in, belonging to, falling under; ضمنھم من among them; وضمنا مباشرة (mubāšaratan) directly and indirectly
ضمني ḍimnī included, implied; hidden, implicit, tacit 545
ضمن ḍamān responsibility, guaranty, warrant, surety, security, liability, assurance, saveguard; insurance │ ضمان جماعي (jamā‘ī) collective security; الضمان المشترك (muštarak) do.; الضمان محدود of limited liability, Ltd.; الضمان شركة širkat aḍ-ḍ. insurance company
ضمين ḍamīn pl. ضمناء ḍumanā’  responsible, answerable, liable (ب for); warrantor, bail(sman), bondsma, surety, guarantor (ب for)
ضمانة ḍamāna guaranty, surety, warrant(y), collateral, security, bail
اضمن aḍman  offering better guaranty
تضامن taḍāmun mutuality, reciprocity; joint liability; solidarity │ التضامن شركة širkat at-t. commercial company of joint liability
 ضامن ḍāmin responsible, answerable, liable; warrantor, bail(sman), bondsman, surety, guarantor
مضمون maḍmūn guaranteed, ensured, warranted; insured (object); (pl. مضامين maḍāmīn) content, purport, meaning (of a letter, and the like) │ الوصول مضمون registered (letter); مضمون دين (dain) bonded, or funded, debt (fin.)
مضمن muḍamman included, implied
ضمن mutaḍāmin mutual, reciprocal; solidary, united in solidarity
ضن ḍanna (1  pers. perf. ḍanintu) a and ḍanna (1  pers. perf. ḍanantu) i (ḍann) to keep back (ب s.th.), be sparing or stingy ( على ب toward s.o. with), withhold (على ب from s.o. s.th.), (be)grudge (على s.o. ب s.th.) │ على بمشقة ضن ما (bi-mašaqqatin) to shun no effort for the sake of
ضن ḍann: ب ضنا (ḍannan) in order to spare s.th., in due consideration of
ضنين ḍanīn niggardly, avaricious, stingy; sparing, thrifty, economical, scanty, meager, poor, insufficient
ضنك ḍanuka u (ḍank, ضناكة ḍanāka) to be straitened, cramped, confined (circumstances); to be weak, be exhausted
ضنك ḍank poverty, distress, straits │ ضنك عيش (‘ail) a hard, wretched life
مضانك maḍānik  straits, hardships
مضنك muḍnik weak, exhausted
ضنو ḍanw, ḍinw children
ضنى ḍaniya a (ḍanan) to become or be lean, emaciated, gaunt, enervated, or worn out; to pine away, be consumed (with grief) IV to emaciate, debilitate, weaken, enervate (. s.o.); to exhaust, wear out (ه s.o.); to undermine, sap (ه the health); to consume (ه s.o.; of anxiety, and the like)
ضن ḍanin, lean, emaciated, gaunt, languished, wasted, worn out, enervated; exhausted; consumed with grief, careworn
ضنى ḍanan weakness feebleness, debility, exhaustion, emaciation; grief
مضنى muḍnan lean, emaciated, gaunt, languished, wasted, worn out, enervated; exhausted; pining away, wasting away
ضھد ḍahada a (ḍah) to suppress, oppress, treat unjustly, persecute (ه s.o.) VIII = I
اضطھاد iḍṭihād pl. -āt suppression, repression, oppression, maltreatment, persecution, enslavement
مضطھد muṭahid oppressor, tyrant, persecutor
ضھر ḍahr pl. ضھور ḍuhūr summit, top (of a mountain)
ضھى III to be similar, alike, or corresponding; to resemble (ه s.o. ھ s.th.), be like s.o. or s.th. (ه ھ،), correspond (ه to s.o., ھ to s.th.); to compare (ھ ب ,على s.th. with; بين وبين -- two things); to imitate (ب s.o., s.th.)
ضھى ḍahān O menopause, climacteric 546
ضھى ḍaīy similar, (a)like, corresponding, analogous
مضاھاة muḍāhāh similarity, resemblance, likeness, correspondence, analogy; comparison (على with)
مضاه muḍāh similar, (a)like, corresponding, analogous
ضوء) ضاء) ḍā’a u (ḍau’) to gleam, beam, radiate, shine II to light (ھ s.th., a lamp), to illumine, illuminate (ھ s.th.,
e.g., a house) IV = I; to shed light, out light (على upon, over); to light, illumine, illuminate (ھ s.th.); to enlighten (ھ s.th., the mind) V = I; X to be illumined, be lit, to seek light, to seek (to obtain) enlightenment or insight (ب by, through, in, with), to let o.s. be enlightened or guided (ب by)
ضوء ḍau’ pl. اضواء light; brightness, glow │ الشمس ضوء ḍ. aš-šams sunlight, sunshine; القمر ضوء ḍ. al-qamar moonlight; كاشف ضوء searchlight; ضوء النھار ḍ. an-nahār daylight; ضوء على (with foll. genit.) in the light of, under the circumstances of, as seen from ...; according to
ضوئي ḍau’ī luminary, light- (in compounds) │ضوئية سنة (sana) light-year
ضياء ḍiyā’ light, brightness, glow
اضاءة iḍā’a lighting, illumination │ المقيدة اإلضاءة (muqayyada) restricted
 مصباح اإلضاءة dim-out; = illumination
miṣbāḥ al-i. incandescent lamp
مضيء muḍī’ shining, luminous, bright
ضاد ḍād name of the letter ض
ضور) ضار) ḍāra u (ḍaur) to harm, injure, damage, prejudice (ه ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), inflict damage (ه ھ، upon); to suffer violent hunger, starve to death V to writhe with pain; to writhe, wince, be convulsed (ھ with pain. with hunger)
ضور ḍaur violent hunger
ضوضاء ḍauḍā noise, din, uproar
ضوضى ḍauḍan noise, din, uproar
ضوع) ضاع) ḍā‘a u (ḍau’) to spread, diffuse, emanate (fragrance); to be fragrant, exhmale fragrance V = I
ضامة look up alphabetically
ضوى ḍawā i to resort, have recourse (الى to); -- ḍawiya a to be lean, thin, spare, slight, scrawny IV اضوى to weaken, debilitate (,ھ ه s.o. s.th.), to harm, injure, damage, prejudice (ه s.o., ھ s.th.) VII to join, follow (الى s.o.), attach o.s. (الى to s.o.), to rally, flock (الى around, لوائه تحت) around  or under s.o.’s banner)
ضاو ḍāwin thin, lean, spare, slight, scrawny
ضير) ضار) ḍāra i (ḍair) to harm, injure, damage, prejudice (ه ,ھ s.o., s.th.), inflict damage (ه ,ھ upon)
ضير ḍair harm, damage, injury, prejudice; wrong, iniquity, offense
ضيزى قسمة qisma ḍīzā unjust division
ضيع) ضاع) ḍā‘a i (ḍai‘, ضياع ḍayā‘) to get lost, be lost (على for s.o.), to lose itself, disappear; to perish II and IV to ruin, let perish, thwart, frustrate, mar, destroy (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to lose. forfeit (ھ s.th.), be deprived (ھ of s.th.); to waste, squander, sped uselessly (ه s.th.); to neglect, omit (ھ s.th.); to miss, let go by (ھ s.th.), let slip ( ھ s.th., e.g., an opportunity) │ حقه ضيع (ḥaqqahū) to forfeit one’s right; الصيف  اللبن ضيعت aṣ-ṣaifa ḍayya‘ti l-labana (invar.) approx.: you have let the opportunity go by, you milled your chance; صوابه اضاع (ṣawābahū) to lose
make to (furṣa) اضاع عليه فرصة mind; one’s
s.o. miss an opportunity; الوقت اضاع (waqt) to waste time
ضيع ḍai‘ loss 547
ضيعة ḍai‘a pl. ضياع ḍiyā‘ landed estate, country estate, domain; small village, hamlet
ضياع ḍayā‘ loss; ruin, destruction, perdition │ الوقت ضياع ḍ. al-waqt loss of time
ضيعانة يا yā ḍī‘āna what a loss!
مضياع miḍyā‘ prodigal, squandering, wasteful; squanderer, wastrel, spend-thrift
تضييع taḍyī‘ waste, squandering, dissipation; neglect, omission
اضاعة iḍā‘a waste, squandering, dissipation; neglect, omission │ اضاعة الوقت i. al-waqt waste of time
ḍiyā‘ ضياع ḍuyya‘, ضيع pl. ḍā’i‘ ضائع
(getting) lost; poor, wretched, miserable
مضيعة maḍī‘a ruin, destruction, perdition, lost; -- muḍī‘a, للوقت مضيعة (li-l- waqt) waste of time, loss of time
مضيع muḍayyi‘ prodigal, squandering, wasteful
ضيف) ضاف) ḍāfa i (ضيافة ḍiyāfa) to stop or stay as a guest II to take in as a guest, receive hospltably, entertain (ه s.o.) IV = II; to add, subjoin, annex, attach (الى ھ s.th. to); to admix (ھ الى s.th. to); to connect, bring in relation (ھ الى s.th. with); to ascribe, attribute, assign (الى ھ s.th. to s.o.) │ اسم الى اسما اضاف (isman) to annex a noun (the first member of a genitive construction) to another (the second member; gram.); ان ذلك الى اضف (aḍif) what’s more ..., moreover..., furthermore
…, VII to be added, be annexed, be subjoined, be attached (الى to) X to invite s.o, (ه) to be one’s guest
aḍyāf, اضياف ḍuyūf, ضيوف pl. ḍaif ضيف
ضيفان ḍīfān guest; visitor
ضيافة ḍiyāfa hospltable reception, entertainment as guest, accommodation; hospltality │ ضيافتي في انت you are my guest
 مضياف miḍyāf hospltable; hospltable host
مضافة muḍāfa hostel, guesthouse, inn مضيفة mayafa guest room; guesthouse اضافة iḍāfa addition, apposition;
subjunction, annexation, appending, attachment, augmentation, supplementation; assignment, allocation; ascription, attribution (الى to); genitive construction (gram.) │ اجل الى اضافة (ajal) limitation (of a legal transaction; Isl.
Law); الى باالضافة in comparison with, in relation to; with respect to, regarding ...; with regard to, in consideration of; in addition to, beside; ذلك الى باالضافة moreover, furthermore, besides
اضافي iḍāfī additional, supplementary, auxiliary, contributory, extra; secondary, subsidiary, tributary, accessory, incidental, side-, by- (in compounds); relative (philos.)
اضافية iḍāfīya relativity (philos.)
مضيف muḍīf host
مضيفة muḍīfa hostess; air hostess, stewardess
مضاف muḍāf added, subjoined, adjoined, apposed; construct state (gram.)
│ اليه المضاف the second, or governed, noun of a genitive construction (gram.); ذلك الى مضافا moreover, furthermore, besides
ضاق) ضيق) ḍāqa i (ḍaiq) to be or become narrow, straitened, cramped, confined; to become too narrow, too confined (ب for); to be anguished, uneasy, depressed, dejected (ب because of, by, at, about); to become or be tired, weary (ب of s.o., of s.th.) │ األرض به ضاقت (arḍu) to be at a loss, be at one’s wit’s end; الحياة به ضاق (ḥayātu) life depressed him, 548 he had a bad time, he was bad off; السبل به ضاقت (subulu) to be at a loss, be at the end of one’s tether, be at one’s wit’s end; به ضاق ب ذرعا (dar‘an) not to be up to s.th.. be unable to do or accomplish s.th.; not to be able to stand or bear s.th., be fed up with, be tired of, feel uneasy about, be oppressed by; ذرعا عنه ضاق do.; صدره ضاق (ṣadruhū) to be annoyed, angry; يده ضاقت
عن (yaduhū) to be incapable of; to be too poor to … II to make narrow or narrower, narrow (down), straiten, cramp, tighten, confine, constrain, restrain, restrict, contract (ھ s.th.); to pull tight (ھ s.th., e.g., a dress); to harass, oppress, beset, besiege, beleaguer (على s.o.); to keep (على s.o.) short (في in s.th.) │ الحصار ضيق to tighten the blockade; نفسه على ضيق to restrain o.s., take restrictions upon o.s. III to vex, annoy, anger (ه s.o.); to harass, oppress, beset (ه s.o.); to trouble, bother, inconvenience, disturb, hinder, hamper, impede, affect gravely (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), bear down heavily (ه ھ، upon); to cause trouble (ه to s.o.) VI to be or become narrow, to narrow; to become annoyed, become irritated; to be angry (من at, about)
ضيق ḍīq narrowness; tightness, closeness; confinement, restriction, limitation, constraint; shortage, scarcity; oppression, anguish; dejectedness, depression, distress; lack, want, paucity, poverty; care, worry, anxiety; anger, annoyance, irritation, exasperation; weariness, ennui │ اليد ذات ضيق ḍ. dāt al- yad poverty, destitution; المقام ضيق ḍ. al- maqām crampedness lack of space; ضيق النطاق do.; small range, limited extent, narrow scope; اليد ضيق ḍ. al-yad poverty, destitution
ضيق ḍayyiq narrow; tight; cramped; short, scarce; confined, limited, restricted
│ الخلق ضيق ḍ. al-kalq illiberal, ungenerous; impatient, annoyed; ضيق الصدر ḍ. aṣ-ṣadr vexed, annoyed (ب over, at, by), angry (ب at, with); upset, depressed, downcast, dejected; العقل ضيق ḍ. al-‘aql narrow-minded, hidebound, dull-witted; النطاق ضيق small-range; of narrow scope, limited in extent; confined, limited, restricted
ضيقة ḍaiqa, ḍīqa straitened circumstances, poverty; anguish
اضيق aḍyaq  narrower, tighter
مضيق maḍīq pl. مضايق maḍāyiq , مضائق strait(s); defile, (mountain) pass; narrow(s), stricture
تضييق taḍyīq narrowing, tightening; restriction, limitation; oppression │ تضييق الحصار tightening of the blockade; تضييق
 الخناق (tightening of the rope =) strangling, suppression
مضايقة muḍāyaqa pl. -āt affliction, distress, grievance, embarrassment; obstruction, impediment. disturbance, harassment, molestation; depressing state; anger, annoyance, vexation, irritation; inconvenience, difficulty, trouble, nuisance
ضائقة ḍā’iqa pl. ضوائق ḍawā’iq  predicament, straits, difficulty; critical situation, crisis │ العيش ضائقة ḍ. al-‘aiš straitened circumstances; مالية ضائقة (mālīya) financial straits
مضايق muḍāyiq troublesome, irksome, wearisome, disturbing, annoying; nuisance (person)
متضايق mutaḍāyiq annoyed, vexed, irritated, exasperated, hungry; hard pressed
 ضيم) ضام) ḍāma i (ḍaim) to wrong, harm (ه s.o.), inflict damage (ه upon s.o.); to treat unjustly (ه s.o.) X = I
ضيم ḍaim pl. ضيوم ḍuyūm wrong, inequity, injustice; harm, damage, detriment, injury
ضامة look up alphabetically
ط
ط abbreviation of قيراط qīrāṭ طاء ṭā’ name of the letter ط طابة ṭāba pl. -āt ball
طابور ṭābūr pl. طوابير ṭawābīr  battalion; (eg.) line, file, single file (of soldiers, of persons walking one behind the other); queue │ الخامس الطابور the fifth column
طابية ṭābiya pl. طواب ṭawābin fortress, fort; round fortress tower; (eg.) rook, castle (chess)
طاجن ṭājin pl. طواجن ṭawājin  frying pan; (eg.) shallow earthen pot
طور see طار، طارة
طارمة pl. -āt kiosk, booth, cabin, stall
طازة ṭāza fresh, tender, new
طازج ṭāza fresh, new
طوس see طاسة and طاس 
طواويس pl. ṭāwūs طاووس and ṭā’ūs طاؤوس 
ṭawāwīs  peacock
طأطأ ṭa’ṭa’a to incline, bend, tilt, bow (رأسه ra’sahū one’s head; also used without رأسه)
مطأطئ muṭa’ṭi’ with bowed head
ar-ra’s m. مطأطأ الرأس muṭaṭa’: مطأطأ
with bowed head
 طاق ṭāq pl. -āt, طيقان ṭīqān arch (arch.); (pl.
-āt) layer, stratum
 طاقة ṭāqa pl. -āt window
 طاقية ṭāqīya pl. □ طواقي ṭawāqī white cotton skullcap (often worn under the tarboosh: in Eg. = عرقية); fatigue cap (of the Eg.
Territorial Army)
طمأن see طأمن
طاولة (It. tavola) ṭāwula table │ الطاولة لعبة la‘bat aṭ-ṭāwila backgammon, tricktrack; الطاولة تنس table tennis
طب ṭabba u i (ṭabb, ṭibb, tubb) to treat medically (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), give medical treatment (ه ھ، to s.o., to s.th.); to seek to remedy, tackle (ل s.th.) II to treat medically (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), give medical treatment (ه ھ، to s.o., to s.th.) V to receive, or undergo, medical treatment, submit to medical treatment; to practice medicine, engage in the medical field X to seek medical advice (ه from s.o.), consult ( ه a doctor)
طب ṭibb medical treatment: medicine, medical science │ األسنان طب ṭ. al-asnān dentistry, dental science; البيطري الطب (baiṭarī) veterinary science; الشرعي الطب (šar‘ī) forensic medicine; النفساني الطب (nafsānī) psychiatry; الطب علم ‘ilm aṭ-ṭ. medical science, medicine; الطب كلية kullīyat aṭ-ṭ. medical school, medical college, (chiefly G. B.:) faculty of medicine
طبي ṭibbī medical, pertaining to the medical profession or science │ طبيا الئق (ṭibbīya) physically fit (e.g., for military service)
طبة ṭabba pl. -āt (eg.) cushion, pad; plug, stopper, stopple; bung
 طبيب ṭabib pl. اطبة اطباء ، aṭibba physician, doctor │ بيطري طبيب (baiṭarī) veterinarian; خاص طبيب (kāṣṣ) physician in ordinary, private physician (e.g., of a king); ساحر طبيب medicine man, shaman; األسنان طبيب dental surgeon, dentist; طبيب شرعي (šar‘ī) medical examiner (jur.); طبيب الجلدية األمراض (jildīya) dermatologist 550
طبيبة ṭabība female doctor, doctress
طبابة ṭibāba medical treatment; medical profession
تطبيب taṭbīb healing art, medical practice, medical profession
متطبب mutaṭabbib quack, quacksalver
طبخ ṭabaka a (ṭabk) to cook (ھ s.th.) VII to be or get cooked
طبخ ṭabk cooking, cookery; cooked food; O celluloid
طبخة ṭabka (n. un.) (article of cooked) food, meal, dish, course
طباخ ṭabbāk cook
طبيخ ṭabīk cooked food, fare
طباخة ṭibāka culinary art, cookery, cuisine
مطبخ maṭbak pl. مطابخ maṭābik  kitchen; cookshop, eating house, luncheonette
مطبخ miṭbak pl. مطابخ maṭābik  any cooking apparatus (also, e.g., a hot plate), cooking stove, kitchen range, portable range
 طبر ṭabar hatchet, ax, battle-ax
طبردار ṭabardār sapper, pioneer (mil.)
  طابور look up alphabetically
 طبرية ṭabarīya  Tiberias (city in Palestine, on W shore of Sea of Galilee)
طبشورة ṭabšūra (syr.) chalk
طباشير ṭabāšīr  chalk
طباشيري ṭabāšīrī chalky, cretaceous, chalk- (in compounds)
طبطب ṭabṭaba to gurgle, purl (water); to pat, stroke, caress (على s.o.)
طبطابة ṭabṭāba bat, mallet, racket (for ball games)
طبع ṭaba‘a a (ṭab‘) to provide with an imprint, impress or impression (ھ or على s.th.); to impress with a stamp, seal or signet (ھ or على s.th.), leave or set one’s stamp, seal, mark, or impress (على or ه ھ، on s.o. on s.th.); to stamp, imprint, impress (ه على s.th. on); to mint, coin (ھ money); to print (ھ s.th.); pass. ṭubi‘a to have a natural aptitude or disposition, have a propensity, be disposed by nature (على for) │ طبعه بطابعه (bi-ṭābi‘ihī) to place, set, or leave one’s stamp, mark, or impress on s.o. or s.th., impart one’s own character to s.o. or s.th.; عليه طبع (ṭubi‘a) to be innate, inherent in s.o., be native, natural to s.o. II to tame, domesticate, break in, train (ھ an animal) V بطباعه تطبع (bi-ṭibā‘ihī) to take on, assume, or receive s.o.’s peculiar character, bear s.o.’s stamp or impress VII to be stamped, be printed, be imprinted, be impressed; to leave an imprint or impression (في on); to be disposed by nature (على for)
طبع ṭab‘ printing (of a book), print; (pl. طباع ṭibā‘) impress, impression, stamp, hallmark, peculiarity, characteristic, nature, character, temper, (natural) disposition │ الحجر طبع al-ḥajar lithography; الحروف طبع typography; تحت الطبع in (the) press, at press (typ.); مسودة الطبع muswaddat and musawwadat aṭ-ṭ. proof sheet, galley proof (typ.); الطبع اعادة i‘ādat aṭ-ṭ. reprinting reprint; طبعا ṭab‘an or بالطبع by nature, by natural disposition; naturally! of course! certainly! to be sure! الطبع سيئ sayyi’ aṭ-ṭ. ill-disposed, ill- natured, evil by nature; الطباع) الطبع شاذ) šadd aṭ-ṭ. eccentric, extravagant
طبعة ṭab‘a pl. -āt printing, print; edition, issue, impression
طباع ṭabbā‘ printer
آلة الطباعة │ printing of art ṭibā‘a طباعة
printing press
طباعي ṭibā‘ī typographic(al) 551
طبيعة ṭabī‘a pl. طبائع ṭabā’i‘  nature; natural disposition, constitution; peculiarity, individuality, character; regular, normal manner; physics; natural science │ الحال بطبيعة by the very nature of the case, as is (was) only natural, ipso facto, naturally, as a matter of course; عالم
 علم الطبيعة scientist; natural physicist; الطبيعة فلسفة ما science; natural physics; aṭ-ṭ. ‘ilm metaphysics; (falsafatu) وراء )بعد( الطبيعة the طبائع األشياء supernatural; فوق الطبيعة affairs of state things, of nature
طبيعي ṭabī‘ī nature’s, of nature, nature- (in compounds), natural; inborn, innate, inherent, native; normal, ordinary, usual, regular; physical; physicist; natural scientist; naturalist │ طبيعي عالم physicist; natural scientist; الطبيعيات physics; natural science
مطبع maṭba‘ print shop, printing office, printing house, press
مطبعة maṭba‘a pl. مطابع maṭābi‘  print shop, printing office, printing house, press
│ المطابع حرية ḥurrīyat al-m. freedom of the press
مطبعي maṭba‘ī printing, printer’s (in compounds), typographic(al) │ مطبعي خطأ (kaṭa’) and مطبعية غلطة (galṭa) typographical error, misprint, erratum
مطبعجي (eg.) majba‘gī printer
مطبعة miṭba‘a pl. مطابع maṭābi‘  printing machine, printing press
طابع ṭābi‘ printer; -- ṭāba‘ impress, stamp, mark, character; (pl. طوابع ṭawābi‘ ) seal, signet; stamp; imprint, print, impress, impression; (postage,
etc.) stamp; tablet, pill │ البريد طابع and بريدي طابع postage stamp; تذكاري طابع (tadkārī) commemorative stamp; طابع األصابع fingerprint; الطابع صاحب keeper of the seal; بطابعه طبعه to place, set, or leave, one’s stamp, mark, or impress on s.o. or s.th., impart one’s own character to s.o. or s.th.
مطبوع maṭbū‘ printed, imprinted; stereotyped; pl. -āt printed material, prints; printed matter │ بطابعه مطبوع bearing the stamp, mark or impress of s.o. or s.th., being characterized by; على مطبوع do., being by its very nature ..., having the innate property of...; دوري مطبوع (daurī) a periodical; المطبوعات قانون press law
 طبق II to cover, cover up (ھ s.th.); to make coincident or congruent, cause to coincide, superpose (بين two figures; geom.); to fold (ھ s.th., also, e.g., the
hands); (eg.) to shoe (ھ a hors.); to apply ( ھ على s.th. to); to be common, universal, widespread; to spread (also ھ throughout s.th.), pervade (ھ s.th.); pass. ṭubbiga to be applied, apply, be applicable be effective be valid │ تآلفاق شھرته طبقت (šuhratuhū) he (it) enjoyed, or achieved, world-wide fame; الخافقين صيته طبق (ṣītuhū, kāfiqain) do., his (its) fame spread throughout the world III to bring to coincidence, make coincident or congruent, cause to coincide (وبين -- بين s.th. with), correlate, compare, contrast ( وبين -- بين s.th. with); to adapt, adjust, tally, trim into shape (ھ s.th.); to suit, fit, match (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), go, tally (ه ھ، with), adapt
o.s., adjust o.s. (ه ھ، to s.o., to s.th.); to correspond (ھ to s.th.), concur, agree, conform, be in keeping (ه ھ، with s.o., with s.th.), fit (ھ into s.th.) IV to close, shut (ھ s.th., e.g., the eyes, mouth, etc.); to cover, cover up (على ھ، s.th., also ھ with one’s hand على s.th.); to surround, encircle, encompass (على s.o.); to be agreed, agree, come to an agreement (على on, about) │ يدي على اطبق (yadī) he pressed my hand V to get or be covered or closed VII = V; to be applicable, apply (على to), fit, suit (على s.o., s.th.), hold good (على for), be true (على of); to 552 be in conformity, be consistent, be compatible, be in keeping, conform, agree (على with), correspond (على to s.th.)
طبق ṭibqa (prep.) according to, corresponding to, in accordance with, in conformity with │ ل طبقا (ṭibqan) do.; األصل طبق صورة (ṣūra, aṣl) true copy; exact replica
طبق ṭabaq pl. اطباق aṭbāq lid, cover, plate; dish, shallow bowl; (round) tray, salver; ash tray; (pl. اطباق, also طباق ṭibāq) layer, tier; stratum (of the air); pl. طباق (with foll. genit.) superposed masses, layered formations, piles, large quantities of ... │ طائرة اطباق flying saucers
طبقة يد yad ṭabiqa closed hand
طبقة ṭabaqa pl. -āt layer; stratum (of earth, air, society, etc.); floor, story (of a building); class, category; generation │ O الطخرورية الطبقة (ṭukrūrīya) stratosphere; النجسة الطبقات (najisa) the impure castes, the pariahs; المتوسطة الطبقة (mutawassiṭa) the
 aṭ-ṭ. ḥarb حرب الطبقات class(es); middle al- ṭ. ‘ilm علم طبقات األرض struggle; class regarded معدود في الطبقات الثالثة geology; arḍ third-rate as
طابق ṭābaq, ṭābiq pl. طوابق ṭawābiq  large bricks; floor, story (of a building) │ ا األرضي لطابق (arḍī) ground floor
طاباق ṭābāq pl. طوابيق ṭawābīq  large bricks
طباق ṭibāq (with foll. genit. or suffix) that which is in agreement, in keeping, or in conformity with ..., corresponding, analogous (to s.th.), in accordance (with), conformable (to), consistent (with), compatible (with); antithesis, juxtaposition of contrasting ideas (rhet.)
طبيق ṭabīq (with foll. genit. or suffix) sth. in agreement, in keeping, or in conformity with ..., corresponding, analogous (to s.th.), in accordance (with), consistent (with), compatible (with)
تطبيق taṭbīq adaptation, accommodation, adjustment; application
تطبيقي taṭbīqī applied; practical, serving practical ends │ تطبيقية علوم applied sciences
مطابقة muṭābaqa agreement, conformity, congruity, correspondence
تطابق taṭābuq congruence (geom.)
مطابق muṭābiq corresponding, congruous, conformable, in agreement or conformity (with) │ للحقيقة مطابق true, truthful, veracious, agreeing with the facts, true to nature, lifelike
مطبق muṭbiq entire, complete, utter, absolute, total; -- mutbaq pressed; coated, incrusted (بالذھب with gold); subterranean dungeon, oubliette, underground chamber
│ المطبقة الحروف (muṭbaqa) (phon.) the sounds ṣ, ḍ, ṭ, ẓ
 طباق ṭabāq, ṭubāq (eg.) tobacco
طبل ṭabala u (ṭabl) to beat a drum; to drum II = I; to beat the drum (ل for s.o., i.e., to campaign, make propaganda for s.o.)
طبل ṭabl drumming, drumbeat; (pl. طبول ṭubūl, اطبال aṭbāl) drum; bass drum (of the Western orchestra)
al-udun ṭ. طبلة األذن │ drum ṭabla طبلة
eardrum, tympanic membrane
طبلة ṭabla pl. -āt, طبل ṭubal (eg.) look, padlock
طبلي ṭablī drum-shaped
طبال ṭabbāl pl. -ūn, drummer
مطبل muṭabbal moist, damp (ground)
  طبلة ṭabla pl. -āt table
طبلة ṭablīya pl. -āt, □ طبالي ṭabālī a low, round table; turntable; tray, wooden salver
  طبن ṭabina a to be bright, intelligent
طبن ṭabin bright, intelligent 553
 طابونة ṭābūna (طبونة ṭābūna) pl. -āt a small, jar-shaped oven, sunk in the ground, open on top, used for baking bread; bakery; (pal., eg.) (baker’s) oven
 طبن ṭabbān pl. -āt (wheel) tire
طبنجة ṭabanja pl. -āt pistol
طابية ṭābiya pl. طواب look up alphabetically
طاجن ṭājin pl. طواجن ṭawājin  frying pan; (eg.) shallow earthen pot
طحطح ṭaḥṭaḥā to break, shatter, smash (ھ s.th.)
طحل (ṭuḥl) sediment, dregs, less
طحال (ṭiḥāl pl. -āt, طحل ṭuḥul spleen, milt
طحالي ṭiḥālī splenic
طحال ṭuḥal inflammation of the spleen, splenitis
مطحول maṭḥūl having a diseased spleen, splenetic
طحلب ṭuḥlub (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. طحالب ṭaḥālib 
water moss
طحن ṭaḥana a (ṭaḥn) to grind, mill, bray, pulverize (ھ, s.th., esp. grain); to crush, ruin, destroy (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to wear out, wear down (ه s.o.), exact as heavy toll (ه of s.o.; age, yean) VI to quarrel, wrangle, be antagonistic, be in conflict (with one another), to conflict
طحن ṭiḥn flour, meal
طحين ṭaḥīn flour, meal
طحيني ṭaḥīnī mealy, farinaceous
 طحينية ṭaḥīnīya (eg.) a sweet made of sesame-seed, meal and sugar
طحينة ṭaḥīna (eg., syr.) a thick sauce made of sesame oil, and served with salads, vegetables, etc.
طحان ṭaḥḥān miller
pl. ṭāhūna طاحونة and ṭāḥūn طاحون طاحونة الھواء │ grinder mill, ṭawāḥīn  طواحن windmill al-hawā’ ṭ.
مطحنة miṭḥana pl. مطاحن maṭāḥin  mill, grinder
مطحنة maṭḥana pl. مطحنة maṭḥana  mill; flour mill
طاحن ṭāḥin molar tooth, grinder
طاحنة ṭāḥina pl. طواحن ṭawāḥin  molar tooth, grinder
O الطحرورية الطبقة aṭ-ṭabaqa aṭ-ṭukrūrīya the stratosphere
طر ṭarra u (ṭarr, طرور ṭurūr) to sharpen, hone, whet (ھ s.th.); to grow; to sprout, come out (mustache, hair)
طرا ṭurran altogether, all without exception, one and all
طرة ṭurra pl. طرر ṭurar forelock; knotted cloth or kerchief
طرار ṭarrār pl. طرارة ṭarrara (magr.) tambourine player; rogue, scoundrel
طرأ ṭara’a a (ṭar’, طروء ṭurū’) to descend, break in, come (على upon), overtake, befall (على s.o.), happen unexpectedly (على to s.o.); to occur (على or ل to s.o., of an idea)
│ عليه طرأ ماذا what’s got into him all of a sudden? what’s the matter with him all of a sudden? فكرة عليه طرأت (fikratun) an idea occurred to him, he had an idea; على يطرأ لم يذكر تبدل الحالة (tabaddulun yudkaru) (no change worth mentioning came over the situation, i.e.) the situation remained substantially unchanged IV to praiae, laud, extol (ه s.o.)
طريء ṭarī’ fresh, new
طارئ ṭāri’ foreign, extraneous, extrinsic, unusual; accidental, incidental, casual, unforeseen, unexpected, contingent; a new factor or development intervening suddenly, a contingent; 554
unexpected visitor; sudden stirring, sudden impulses (من e.g., of joy)
طارئة ṭāri’a pl. طوارئ ṭawāri’ unforeseen event, unexpected case, a contingent; new factor or development; incident, accident │ الطوارئ حالة state of emergency
طرآني ṭur’ānī of unknown origin, wild
(in Tripoli طرابلس الشام ṭarābulus : طرابلس Tripoli al-garb ṭ. طرابلس الغرب Lebanon); Libya) (in
طرب ṭriba a (ṭarab) to be moved (with joy or grief); to be delighted, be overjoyed, be transported with joy II to delight, fill with delight, enrapture, please, gratify (ه s.o.); to sing, vocalize, chant IV to delight, fill with delight, enrapture, please, gratify (ه s.o.); to make music; to sing, vocalize, chant: to play music (ه for s.o.), sing (ه to s.o.)
طرب ṭarab pl. اطراب aṭrāb joy, pleasure, delight, rapture; amusement, entertainment (with music and the like); music │ الطرب آلة musical instrument
طرب ṭarib pl. طراب ṭarib moved (with joy or grief), touched, affected; delighted, enraptured, transported, pleased, charmed
طروب ṭarūb gay, merry, lively
اطرب aṭrab  more delightful; making better music, being a batter musician; more melodious
اطراب iṭrāb delight, delectation, diversion
مطرب muṭrib delightful, ravishing, charming, amusing, entertaining; melodious; musician; singer, vocalist, chansonnier
مطربة muṭriba singer, songstress, vocalist, chanteuse
طربيزة ṭarābēza (eg.) table
طرابلس look up alphabetically
طربوش ṭarbūš pl. طرابيش ṭarābīš tarboosh, fez طرابيشي ṭarābīšī tarboooh merchant مطربش muṭarbaš wearing a tarboosh,
tarbooshed
 متطربش mitaṭarbiš wearing a tarboosh, tarbooshed; hence, in Eg., a member of the white-collar class, of the educated middle class
طرح ṭaraḥa a (ṭarḥ) to throw, cast, fling, toss ( ب على or ھ s.th. onto or upon); to throw, toss, or fling away, throw off, discard, dump (ب or ھ s.th.); to remove, drive away, expel, reject, disown, repudiate (ب or ه ھ، s.o., s.th.): to throw or put (ھ على a garment on or over s.o.); to present, submit (على ه s.th. to s.o.); to teach (على ه a tune to s.o.); to cede, surrender, yield (ل ھ s.th. to s.o.); to miscarry, have a miscarriage; to deduct, subtract, discount ( من ھ s.th. from) │ العامة المناقصة في طرحه (munāqaṣa, ‘āmma) to invite tenders, or bide, publicly for s.th. (e.g., the government for some project); عليه طرح سؤاال (suālan) to put a question to s.o.; طرح البحث بساط على مسألة (mas’alatan, b. il-baḥt) to broach or raise a question, present a problem for consideration II to cause a miscarriage (ھا to a woman); اطراحا ھ طرح (iṭṭirāḥan) to throw s.th. far away, fling s.th. off or away III to exchange (ھ ه with
s.o. s.th.) │ الكالم طارحه (kalām) to converse with s.o., have a talk with s.o.; الحديث طارحه to chat with s.o., have a conversation with s.o.; األسئلة طارحه (as’ila) to exchange questions with s.o. V to drop, fall, or tumble to the ground VI to exchange with one another (ھ e.g., thoughts) VII to be flung, be tossed, be thrown, be rejected, be expelled, be disowned, be repudiated; to throw o.s. down, prostrate 555 o.s. (e.g., األرض على on the ground); to be thrown down, be dropped VIII to throw far away, fling off or away (ھ s.th.); to discard, throw away ( ھ s.th.)
طرح ṭarḥ expulsion, rejection, repulsion, banishment, repudiation; miscarriage, abortion; subtraction, deduction, discount │ البحر طرح ṭ. al-baḥr (eg.) alleviation, alluvial deposits
طرح ṭarḥ miscarried foetus
طرحة ṭarḥa pl. طرح ṭuraḥ veil (sometimes embroidered) worn by Arab women as a headcloth; headcloth, head veil
طريح ṭarīḥ pl. طرحى ṭarḥā thrown down, cast down, dumped; thrown to the ground, felled, prostrate; expelled, banished, rejected, disowned, repudiated
│ الفراش طريح bedridden, confined to bed
طريحة ṭarīḥa assignment, task │ شغل بالطريحة (šugl) job work, piecework (eg.)
ṭarārīḥ  طراريح pl. ṭarrāḥa طراحة
mattress; hassock, ottoman
اطروحة uṭrūḥa dissertation, thesis (Syr.)
مطرح maṭraḥ pl. مطارح maṭāriḥ  place where s.th. is thrown or at which s.th. is discarded, a dump; place, spot, location, locality; seat (in an auditorium)
اطراح iṭrāḥ rejection, repudiation
مطروح maṭrūḥ thrown down, out down, damped, thrown off, discarded; lying on the ground, prostrate; subtrahend (math.)
(math.) minuend المطروح منه │
منطرح munṭariḥ thrown down, out down, dumped, thrown off, discarded; expelled, banished, rejected, disowned, repudiated
طرخون ṭarkūn tarragon (Artemisia dracunculus; bot.)
طرد ṭarada u (ṭard) to drive away, chase away, push away, shove away, reject, repel, banish, exile, dismiss, drive out, expel, evict (ه من، ھ s.o., s.th. from); to chase, hunt, hound (ه ھ، s.o. s.th.) │ من طرده منصبه (manṣibihī) to relieve s.o. of his office, dismiss s.o. II = I; III to assault, attack (ه ھ، s.o.), launch an attack (ه ھ، on); to stalk (ھ an animal, game); to pursue, follow (ه ھ، s.o. s.th.), run after
s.o. or s.th. (ه ھ،), give chase (ه ھ، to) VIII to drive away as booty (ھ animals); to be consecutive, be continuous, form an uninterrupted sequence, succeed one another continuously; to sow uninterruptedly, carry water perennially (river); to progress or get on at a rapid pace, make good headway (undertaking) X to proceed (in one’s speech), go on to say, continue (ھ s.th., e.g., one’s speech); to change, pass on (in speech) (ل – من from -- to); to digress (in speaking), make an excursus │ قوله الى ذلك من استطرد (qaulihī) thereupon he proceeded to speak
 about ..., then he broached the subject of ..., after that he went on to say that ...
طرد ṭard driving away, chasing away, repulsion, expulsion, eviction, dismissal, banishment, expatriation; pursuit, chase, hunt; swarm (of bees); (pl. طرد ṭurūd) parcel, package │ وعكسا طردا مسألة بحث (mas’alata ṭardan wa-‘aksan) to study a problem from all sides, in all its aspects
طرد ṭardī parcel-, package- (in compounds), like a parcel or package
طردة ṭarda (n. vic.) a driving away, chasing away, repulsion, expulsion, eviction, banishment
طريد ṭarīd expelled, evicted, ousted, outcast, outlawed, banished, exiled, expatriate(d); fugitive, fleeing, on the 556 run; expellee; outcast, outlaw; الطريدان aṭ- ṭarīdān night and day
طريدة ṭarīda pl. طرائد ṭarā’id  game animal, game beast; game
طراد ṭarrād cruiser (warship); (eg.) dike, embankment, dam, levee (esp. of the Nile)
طرادة ṭarrāda cruiser (warship)
طراد ṯirād pursuit, chase
مطارد muṭārada repulsion, expulsion, banishment; pursuit, chase; hunt │ طائرة المطاردة fighter plane, pursuit plane, interceptor
اطراد iṭṭirād uninterrupted or regular sequence, continuity
استطراد istiṭrād pl. -āt digression, divagation; excursus
مطارد muṭārid pursuer; hunter │ طائرة مطاردة fighter plane, pursuit plane, interceptor
مطرد muṭṭarid incessant, uninterrupted, continuous, continual, unvarying, steady, constant; general │ مطردة قاعدة general rule; النسق مطرد m. an-nasaq uniform (adj.); النغم مطرد m. an-nagm monotonous (song)
طرز II to embroider (ھ s.th.); to embellish (ھ a story); to garnish (ب ھ s.th., e.g., a dish with)
طرز ṭarz pl. طروز ṭurūz type, model, make, brand, sort, kind; fashion, style
طرزي ṭarzī fashion- (in compounds)
طراز ṭirāz pl. طرز ṭuruz, اطرزة aṭriza type, model, class, make, brand, sort, kind, variety, species; fashion, style; architectural style; embroidery │ الطراز من القديم old-fashioned, outmoded; الطراز قديم do.; الطراز بأقدم مسلح musallaḥ bi-aḥdat ṭ. equipped with the latest arms; الطراز من األول (awwal) first-class, first-rate
تطريز taṭrīz embroidering, embroidery
طرس ṭirs pl. اطرس aṭrās, طروس ṭurūs sheet (of paper); paper
طرش ṭariša a (ṭaraš) to be or become deaf; -- ṭaraša u to vomit, throw up, disgorge II to deafen (ه s.o.)
طرش ṭarš whitewashing
طرش ṭarš pl. طروش ṭurūš (syr.) hard (of cattle), flock (of sheep)
طرش ṭaraš deafness
طرشة ṭrša deafness
طرش pl. ṭaršā’ , طرشاء f. aṭraiš , اطرش
ṭurš deaf اسك اطرش (ašakk ) stone-deaf
مطرش muṭarriš vomitive; emetic
 طرشي ṭuršī mixed pickles
طرطر ṭarṭara to brag, boast, swagger, show off طرطور ṭurṭūr pl. طراطير ṭarāṭīr  high, conical cap (of dervisheo, clowns, etc.) طرطور ṭarṯūr and طراطور ṭarāṭūr (eg.,
syr.) a sort of mayonnaise (made of ṭaḥīna, parsley, lemon, oil, milk, garlic and nuts)
طرطش ṭarṯaša to splash, bespatter, splatter (ه s.o.); to roughcast (ھ a building, a wall)
طرطوفة ṭarṭūfa end, tip, point; Jerusalem artichoke (Helianthus tuberosus L.; bot.); truffle
طرطير ṭarṭīr tartar, wine stone
طرف ṭarafa, (ṭarf) to blink, twinkle, wink, squint (also بعينيه bi-‘ainaihi); -- ṭarufa u (طرفة ṭarāfa) to be newly acquired, be a recent acquisition IV to feature or tell s.th. new or novel, say s.th. new or original, introduce a novel angle or
 idea; to present (ه s.o. ب with s.th. new or novel), give (ه to s.o. ب s.th. new or novel) V to be on the extreme 557 side, hold an extreme viewpoint or position, go to extremes, be radical, have radical views
طرف ṭarf eye; glance, look │ اشار ما بطرف (ašāra) he didn’t bat an eye; طرف من خفي (kafīy) secretly, furtively, discreetly; الطرف كارتداد ka-rtidādi ṭ-ṭ. in the twinkling of an eye, instantly
طرف ṭaraf pl. اطراف aṭrāf utmost part, outermost point, extremity, end, tip, point, edge, fringe, limit, border; side; region, area, section; من طرف part of, a bit of, some; party (as, to a dispute, of a contract, etc.); ṭarafa (prep.) with, at, on the part or side of; pl. اطراف limbs, extremities; (with foll. genit.) sections of, parts of │ طرفي النھار tarafayi n-nahār in the morning and in the evening, mornings and evenings; النقيض طرفي على كانوا (ṭarafai naqīḍ) they were at variance, they carried on a feud; نقيض طرفي على واياه كان (wa-iyyāhu) they held diametrically opposed views or positions; البدن اطراف a. al-badan the extremities of the bod, the limbs; اطراف األصابع fingertips; قدميه اطراف على (a. qadamaihi) on tiptoe; المدينة اطراف a. al- madīna the outskirts of the city; األطراف المتعاقدة (muta‘āqida) the contracting parties; بطرف with, at, on the part or side of; طرف من on the part of; طرف الى طرف من from one end to the other; اليمين طرف احزاب the right-wing parties; الحديث اطراف جاذي jādaba aṭrāfa l-ḥ. to talk, converse, have a conversation; اطرافھا من البراعة جمع (barā‘ata) to be a highly efficient man, be highly qualified; الشيء اطراف جمع to give a survey or outline of s.th., summarize, sum up s.th.; حياته من (اطرافا) طرفا عليه قص to tell
s.o. an episode (episodes) of one’s life
طرفة ṭarfa: عين بطرفة bi-ṭ. ‘ainin and في عين طرفة in the twinkling of an eye, instantly; عين طرفة -- ما (ṭarfata) not one moment
طرفة ṭurfa pl. طرف ṭuraf novelty, rarity, curiosity, curio, rare object, choice item; exquisite present; masterpiece, chef- d’oeuvre; hit, high light, pièce de résistance
طرفاء ṭarfā’  (coll.; n. un. ة) tamarisk (bot.)
طريف ṭarīf curious, strange, odd; novel, exquisite, singular, rare, uncommon
طريفة ṭarīfa pl. طريفة tarīfa rare, exquisite thing; uncommon object or piece (e.g., of art); pl. طرائف curiosities, oddities, uncommon qualities
طرافة ṭarāfa novelty, uncommonness, peculiarity, oddness, strangeness, curiosity, originality
مطرف miṭraf, muṭraf shawl
تطرف taṭarruf excess, excessiveness, immoderation, extravagance, extremism, extreme standpoint or position, radical attitude, radicalism
طارف ṭārif newly acquired
متطرف mutaṭarrif utmost, outmost, farthest outward, located at the outermost point; extreme, extremistic; radical; an extremist, a radical │ متطرفة جھة (jiha) outlying district, outskirt(s)
طرق taraqa u (ṭarq) to knock, rap, bang (ھ at, on, esp. at a door); to hammer, strike with a hammer, forge (ھ s.th. esp. metal); to come over s.o. (ھ), befall (ب s.o.; of a feeling); to come (ھ ه، to, upon; also of events); to reach (ھ s.th.), get to s.th. (ھ), get as far as s.th. (ھ); to come by night │ اذنه طرق (udunahū) to strike s.o.’s ear, reach s.o.’s ear; بباله طرق (bi-bālihī) to occur to s.o., come to s.o.’s mind; في طرق ذھنه (dihnihī) do.; سمعه طرق (sam‘ahū) and مسامعه طرق to reach s.o.’s ear, come to s.o.’s knowledge or attention; طريقا طرق to tread, travel, follow, take, or use a road; موضوعا طرق to treat of a subject, discuss a 558 topic; to broach a subject, touch on a theme II to hammer, strike with a hammer, forge, extend (ھ s.th., esp. metal) IV to bow one's head in silence │ اطرق رأسه (ra’sahū) or برأسه to bow one’s head V to seek to gain access (الى to); to penetrate (الى s.th. or into s.th.) to get (الى to), reach (الى s.th.), arrive (الى at); (in a speech, and the like) to touch (الى on a subject), go into s.th. (الى), treat of s.th. ( شك اليه يتطرق ال │ (الى (šakkun) not open to doubt, admitting no doubt
 طرقة ṭarqa (n. vic.) pl. ṭaraqāt knock, rap(ping), bang(ing) (e.g., at a door); blow; one time (= طرقتين ،(مرة, ṭarqatain twice
طرقة ṭurqa way, road; passage, passageway, alleyway, corridor
طريق ṭarīq m. and f., pl. طرق ṭuruq, طرقات ṭuruqāt way; road, highway; trail, track, path; method │ الجو طريق ṭ. al-jaww air route; البحر طريق ṭ. al-baḥr sea route; رئيسي طريق (ra’īsī) main road; عام طريق (‘āmm) public road, highway, thoroughfare; عمومية طريق (‘umūmīya) do.; طريق عن by way of, via; by means of, through; الجو طريق عن (ṭ. il-jaww) by air; طريق من by means of, through; الطريق عابر wanderer, wayfarer; الطريق قاطع pl. قطاع الطريق quṭṭā‘ aṭ-ṭ. highwayman, wayfarer, brigand; الطريق قاطع to commit highway robbery; طريقه في كان to have sense, be sensible or normal
طريقة ṭarīqa pl. طرائق ṭarā’iq , طرق ṭuruq manner, mode, means; way, method, procedure; system; creed, faith, religion; (pl. -āt, طرق ṭuruq) religious brotherhood, dervish order │ طريقة االستعمال directions for use
طرقي ṭuruqī pl. -ūn adherent of a religious brotherhood
مطرق miṭraq and مطرقة miṭraqa pl.
مطارق maṭāriq  hammer
مطراق miṭrāq versatile, many-sided, of varied skills or talents
اطراقة iṭrāqa (n. vic.) a bowing of the head
استطراق istiṭrāq transit permission, free passage or entry
طارق ṭāriq pl. طراق ṭurrāq knocking, rapping, banging, striking, beating; nocturnal visitor
ṭawāriq  طوارق pl. ṭāriqa طارقة
misfortune, disaster, calamity
مطروق maṭrūq much-frequented, muchtraveled, well-trodden (road, trail, path) │ مطروق موضوع a much-discussed, frequently treated subject
with مطرق الرأس and muṭriq مطرق head bowed
طرقع ṭarqa‘a (eg.) to crack (intr., also trans.: ب or ھ s.th., e.g., a whip); to crack, crunch ( ھ s.th.)
طارمة ṭārima pl. -āt kiosk, booth, cabin, stall
طرمبة ṭurumba pl. -āt pump
طرو) and طرى) طرو ṭaruwa u, طري ṭariya a ( طراوة ṭarāwa) to be or become fresh, succulent, moist, tender, soft, mild II to make fresh, succulent, moist, tender, soft, mild (ھ s.th.); to moisten, wet (ھ s.th.); to perfume, scent (ھ s.th.) IV to praise (highly), extol, laud (ه s.o.), lavish praise ( ه on s.o.)
طري ṭarīy fresh, succulent, new; moist; tender, soft, mild
طراوة ṭarāwa freshness, succulence, moistness; tenderness, softness, mildness
│ الخلق طراوة ṭ. al-kulq gentleness; softness of character
اطرية iṭriya vermicelli
اطراء iṭrā’ (high) commendation, praise, laudation, extolment 559
طروادة ṭirwāda  (from Fr. Troade) Troy
طازج ṭāzaj look up alphabetically
طزلق (Turk. tozluk) ṭuzluq pl. طزالق ṭazāliq 
gaiter(s), legging(s)
طازة ṭāza look up alphabetically
طزينة (It. dozzina) pl. طزازن ṭazāzin  dozen
طست ṭast, ṭist pl. طسوت ṭusūt basin; washbasin, washbowl
طشت ṭašt, ṭišt pl. طشوت ṭušūt basin; washbasin, washbowl
طشقند ṭašqand Tashkent (capital of Uzbek S.S.R.)
طصلق ṭaṣlaqa (eg.) to do inaccurately, perform sloppily, bungle, botch, scamp (ھ a job, work)
طصلقة ṭaṣlaqa inaccurate, sloppy, or slipsbod work
طعم ṭa‘ima a (ṭa‘m) to eat (ھ s.th.); to taste (ھ s.th.); to relish, enjoy, savor (A s.th.) II to graft, engraft (ھ s.th.); to inoculate, vaccinate (ه ب s.o. with); to inlay (ھ ب s.th. with, e.g., wood with ivory) IV to feed, give to eat (ه ھ s.o. s.th.), nourish (ھ
 ه s.o. with), serve food or drink (ھ) to s.o. (جوع من اطعمه │ (ه (jū‘) to appease s.o.’s hunger V to taste (ھ s.th.) X = V; to ask for food
طعم ṭa‘m pl. طعوم ṭu‘ūm taste, flavor, savor; pleasing flavor, relish
طعمية ṭa‘mīya (eg.) patty made of beans, and seasoned with onion, garlic and parsley
طعم ṭu‘m graft, cion; bait, lure, decoy; (pl. طعوم ṭu‘ūm) vaccine
طعم ṭa‘im tasty, savory, delicious
طعمة ṭu‘ma pl. طعم ṭu‘am food; bait; quarry, catch, bag │ النيران طعمة اصبح aṣbaḥa ṭu‘mata n-nīrān to be destroyed by fire; الحرب لمدافع طعمة (li-madāfi‘i l-ḥarb) cannon fodder
طعام ṭa‘ām pl. اطعمة aṭ‘ima, food, nourishment, nutriment, fare, diet; meal, repast │ الطعام عن اضرب (aḍraba) to go on a hunger strike
مطعم maṭ‘am pl. مطاعم maṭā‘im  eating house, restaurant; dining room; mess, messhall (on a ship); food │ الشعب مطعم m. aš-ša‘b and شعبي مطعم soup kitchen
تطعيم taṭ‘īm inoculation, vaccination; inlay work │ القرنية تطعيم t. al-qarnīya transplantation of the cornea (med.)
اطعام iṭ‘ām feeding
مطعوم maṭ‘ūm tasted; already known
طعن ṭa‘ana u a (ṭa‘n) to thrust, pierce, transfix (ه ھ، ب s.o., s.th. with); to stab (ه s.o.); to defame, discredit, hurt (with words; على or في s.o., s.th.), speak evil (على or في of); to contest, challenge, impeach (حكم في a judgment), appeal (حكم في against a judgment); to refute. disprove (في s.th.); to penetrate, enter (في s.th. or into s.th.) │ السن في طعن (sinn) to be advanced in years, be old; القول في طعن (qaul) to refute a (theological) doctrine VI to thrust each other; to attack each other, battle one another
طعن ṭa‘n piercing, transfixion; slandering, calumniation, defamation; appeal (في against; jur.), challenge, contestation, impeachment (في of; jur.); pl.
طعون ṭu‘ūn calumnies, defamations; attacks
طعنة ṭa‘na (n. vic.) pl. ṭa‘anāt stab, thrust; attack; calumny, defamation, vilification
طاعون ṭā‘ūn pl. طواعين ṭawā‘īn  plague, pestilence │ الدملي الطاعون (dummalī) bubonic plague; البقري الطاعون (baqarī) and الماشية طاعون ṭ. al-māšiya rinderpest, cattle plague, steppe murrain 560
مطاعن maṭā‘in  (pl.) invectives, abuses (
في against s.o.)
aged, (sinn) طاعن في السن and ṭā‘in طاعن رسالة طاعنة │ years in advanced old, lampoon
مطعون maṭ‘ūn plague-infected, plague- stricken
 طغار an Iraqi weight equaling 2000 kg, in Basra 1537 kg
 طغراء ṭugrā’ pl. -āt tughra, calligraphically intricate signature of the Ottoman Sultan, interwoven with his father’s name and his own honorific, customarily used on written decrees, state documents and coins
ṭugrā’  طغراء = ṭugrā طغرى
طغام ṭagām common people, populace; lowly, insignificant
طغمة ṭugma, ṭagma pl. -āt band, troop, group
(طغو and طغا (طغي ṭagā u and طغى ṭagā a (ṭagy) and ṭagiya a (طغى ṭagan, طغيان ṭugyān) to exceed proper bounds, overstep the bounds, be excessive; to be rough, tumultuous, rage (sea); to overflow, leave its banks (river); to flood, overflow, inundate, deluge (على s.th.); to overcome, seize, grip, befall (على s.o.); to be tyrannical or cruel (على against s.o.), tyrannize, oppress, terrorize (على s.o.), ride roughshod (على over s.o.); -- طغى ṭagā a to predominate, prevail, preponderate (على in, at), dominate, outweigh, outbalance ( على s.th.), be preponderant (على over, in comparison with s.th.)
طغوان ṭugwān flood, inundation, deluge
طغيان ṭugyān flood, inundation, deluge; tyranny, oppression, suppression, repression, terrorization
 طاغ ṭāgin pl. طغاة ṭugāh tyrant, oppressor, despot
طاغ ṭāgiya tyrant, oppressor, despot; bully, brute, gorilla
طاغوت ṭāgūt an idol, a false god; seducer, tempter (to error)
طف II to make deficient or scanty (ھ s.th.); to be niggardly, stingy (على toward s.o.), stint (على s.o.)
طفيف ṭafīf deficient; small, little, slight, trivial, trifling, insignificant, inconsiderable
تطفيف taṭfīf stinting, scrimping, niggardliness, stinginess, parsimony
طفئ ṭafi’a a (طفوء ṭufū’) to go out, die down, be extinguished (fire, light); to be out, have gone out (fire, lamp) IV to put out, extinguish, smother, stifle (ھ a fire), turn off, switch off (ھ light); to quench (ھ fire, thirst), slake (ھ thirst, also lime) │ العمل في ليله فحمة واحرق يومه جذوة اطفأ (jadwata yaumihi wa-aḥraqa faḥmata lailihi fī l-‘amal) to work day and night VII = طفئ ṭafi’a
□ طفاية ṭaffāya fire-extinguishing device
مطفأة miṭfa’a pl. مطافئ maṭāfi’ firefighting equipment, fire extinguisher, fire engine │ المطافئ رجال the fire department, the firemen
اطفاء iṭfā’ putting out, quenching, extinguishing, extinction, fire fighting │ الحريق اطفاء جھاز jahāz i. al-ḥarīq firefighting equipment اإلطفاء رجال the fire department, the firemen; اإلطفاء عمليات ‘amalīyāt al-i. fire-fighting operations
اطفائي iṭfā’ī fireman
اطفائية iṭfā’īya fire department
مطفأ muṭfa’ extinguished, gone out, out; mat, dull, flat, lusterless 561
طفح ṭafaḥa a (ṭafḥ, طفوح ṭufūḥ) to flow over, run over, overflow (ب with, also, e.g., the heart with generosity, etc.); to cause to overflow (ب e.g., the milk) II to fill to overflowing, fill to the brim (ھ a vessel); to overfill (ھ s.th.) IV = II
طفح ṭafḥ superabundance, repletion; skin eruption, rash, exanthema (med.)
طفحة ṭafḥa skin eruption, rash, exanthema (med.)
طفحي ṭafḥī eruptive, exanthematic (med.)
طفوح ṭufūḥ superabundance, repletion طفاحة ṭufāḥa skimmings, foam, froth طفحان ṭafḥān , f. طفحى ṭafḥā flowing
over, running over, brimful, replete, overfull, filled to overflowing
مطفحة miṭfaḥa skimmer, skimming ladle
طفح ṭāfiḥ flowing over, running over, brimful, replete, overfull, filled to overflowing
طفر ṭafara i (ṭafr) to jump, leap, bounce │ جوانحھا طفرت approx.: her bosom heaved violently (with joyous agitation)
طفرة ṭafra jump, leap, bounce, bound; impulsive motion, impetuosity; upswing, rise, upturn, successful step; ṭafratan in one leap
طفران ṭafrān pauper, have-not
 □ طفر ṭafar (=ثفر) crupper (of the saddle)
طفش ṭafaša i (ṭafš) to run away, flee, escape (eg.)
طفق ṭafiqa a (ṭafaq) with foll. imperf.: to begin, set out to do s.th.; to do s.th. suddenly
على II to intrude, obtrude, impose o.s. (على upon); to sponge (على on s.o., مائدته على at s.o.’s table), live at other people’s expense V = II; to arrive uninvited or at an inconvenient time, disturb, intrude; to be obtrusive
طفل ṭafl tender, soft; potter’s clay, argil طفل ṭifl pl. اطفال aṭfāl infant, baby, child طفلة ṭifla little girl
طفلي ṭiflī child (adj.), baby (adj.), children’s, of or pertaining to childhood or infancy; infantile, childlike, childish │ الطفلي الطب (ṭibb) pediatrics
طفل ṭafal infancy, babyhood, early childhood; childhood, childhood stage
طفل ṭafla potter’s clay, argil
طفال ṭufāl potter’s clay; argil; clay, loam
 طفالة ṭafāla infancy, babyhood, early childhood; childhood, childhood stage; initial stage, beginnings, dawn, early period
طفولة tufūla infancy, babyhood, early childhood; childhood, childhood stage; children
طفولية ṭufūlīya infancy, babyhood, early childhood; childhood, childhood stage
طفولي ṭufūlī child (adj.), baby (adj.), children’s, of or pertaining to childhood or infancy; infantile, childlike, childish
طفيلي ṭufailī uninvited guest, intruder, obtruder, sponger, hanger-on, parasite, sycophant; pl. طفيليات parasites (med., biol.) │ الطفيليات علم ‘ilm aṭ. parasitology
متطفل mutaṭaffil parasitic(al); parasite, sponger, uninvited guest
طفو) طفا) ṭafā u (طفو ṭafw, ṭufūw) to float, drift; to emerge, rise to the surface │ السطح الى به طفا (saṭḥ) to bring s.th. to the surface 562
طفاءة ṭufā’a anything drifting or floating, driftage, floatage, flotsam; halo (around the sun or moon)
طاف ṭāfin superficial
طافية ṭāfiya floating iceberg
طفئ see ṭaffāya طفاية □
طق ṭaqqa u (ṭaqq) to crack, pop; to clack, smack, flap; to burst, explode
طقس II to introduce into one of the orders of the ministry (Chr.) V to perform a rite, follow a ritual
طقس ṭaqs weather; climate; -- (pl. طقوس ṭuqūs) rite, ritual; religious custom; order of the ministry, clerical rank (Chr.)
طقسي ṭaqsī liturgical; liturgist (Chr.); الطقسيات aṭ-ṭaqsīyāt the liturgical books (Chr.)
طقطق ṭaqṭaqa to crack, snap, rattle, clatter, chug, pop, crash; to crackle, (de)crepitate, rustle
طقطوقة ṭaqṭūqa crash, bang; clap, thud, crack, pop; (pl. طقاطيق ṭaqāṭīq) ditty, gay, popular song
طقم II to harness, bridle (ھ a horse)
طقم ṭaqm pl. طقوم ṭuqūm, طقومة ṭuqūma, اطقم aṭqum a number of complementary objects or things; series; suit (of clothes); set (of tools, and the like); harness (of a horse); service (e.g., of china, etc.) │ طقم األسنان denture, set of teeth
طاقم tāqim = ṭaqm; crew (of a ship) │ األسنان طاقم denture, set of teeth
طل ṭalla u (ṭall) to bespray, besprinkle, bedrizzle, bedew (ھ s.th., esp. the sky -- the earth); -- ṭalla u to emerge, rise, loom up, come into view, appear, show IV to look down (على upon), tower (على above), command a view of s.th. (على), overlook, survey (على s.th.); to command, dominate, overtop (على s.th., e.g., the surrounding area); (of a room, window, etc.) to open ( على upon, to, toward), give (على on), face ( على toward); to look out, peek out, peep out (من of s.th.); to appear, show
طل ṭall pl. اطالل ṭilāl dew; fine rain, drizzle
طلل ṭalal pl. اطالل aṭlāl, طلول ṭulūl, used chiefly in the pl.: remains, ruins (of houses); remains, or traces, of an abandoned encampment
مطلول maṭlūl: مطلول دم (dam) unavenged blood
طلب ṭalaba u (ṭalab, مطلب maṭlab) to look, search (ه ھ، for s.o., for s.th.); to set out (ھ for a place). get on one’s way (ھ to), go to see (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to request (ھ s.th.), apply (ھ for); to seek, try to obtain, claim (ھ من s.th. from), ask, beg (من ھ s.o. for); to demand, exact, require (الى ھ of s.o. s.th.); to want, wish (ھ من s.th. from; الى
s.o. ان to do s.th.); to call (الى upon s.o.), appeal (الى to s.o.), invite, request, entreat, beseech (الى s.o.); to order, demand (من ھ s.th. from), call (ھ for s.th., من from), call in (ھ s.th., من from); to be after s.o. or s.th. (ه ھ،); to study III to demand back, reclaim (ب or ه ھ from s.o. s.th.), call for the return or restitution of s.th. (ب or ھ), demand, claim (ب or ه ھ from s.o. s.th.); to demand, claim (ب s.th.) V to require, necessitate, make necessary or requisite ( ھ s.th.) VII pass. of I
طلب ṭalab search, quest, pursuit; -- (pl.
-āt) demand, claim, call (for), invitation
 (to), solicitation, wish, desire, request, entreaty j application, petition; order, commission; demand (com.); study │ تحت طلبه at s.o.’s disposal; الطلب عند and لدى الطلب on demand, by request, if desired, on application; O الطلب لحين li-ḥīn ṭ-ṭalab at sight (com.); والطلب العرض (‘arḍ) supply and demand; ٣٦٥ العلم طلب ṭ. al-‘ilm quest of knowledge, craving for knowledge, studiousness; الثقة عدم طلب ṭ. ‘adam at-tiqa motion of “no confidence” (parl.)
طلبة ṭalba litany, prayer (Chr.)
طلبة ṭaliba, ṭilba desire, wish, request, demand; application
طلبية ṭalabīya pl. -āt order, commission (com.)
طالب ṭallāb exacting, persistently claiming or demanding
مطلب maṭlab search, quest, pursuit; -- (pl. .,.Jll.. m< الىdlib') demand, oall (for); request, wish; claim; problem, issue; pl. مطالب (claims of the government =) taxes
مطالبة muṭālaba demand; cell, appeal (with genit. or ب for); claim (with genit. or ب to)
طالب ṭālib pl. طالب ṭullāb, طلبة ṭalaba seeker, pursuer; claimer, claimant; applicant, petitioner; candidate; student, scholar, also العلم طالب ṭ. al-‘ilm; pupil; a naval rank, approx.: midshipman (Eg.
1939) │ ممتاز طالب (mumtāz) a naval rank, approx.: ensign (Eg. 1939); الحاجات طالب petitioners; الزواج طالب ṭ. az-zawāj suitor
طالبي ṭālibī student’s, student- (in compounds), of or pertaining to studies or students
مطلوب maṭlūb wanted (in classified ads); due, owed (money); unknown (of a quantity; math.); (pl. مطالب maṭālib ) wish, desire; pl. طلب liabilities, debts; pl. مطاليب claims
مطالب muṭālib claimer, claimant; -- muṭālab one of whom s.th. or s.o. (ب) is demanded, one accountable (ب for), held answerable (ب for)
متطلبات mutaṭallabāt requirements
طلح ṭalaḥa u (طالح ṭalāḥ) to be or become bad, evil, wioked, vicioUi. depraved
طلح ṭalḥ (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. طلوح ṭulūḥ a variety of accacia (Acacia gummifera); banana tree; banana
طلحية ṭalḥīya pl. طالحى ṭalāḥīy sheet of paper
طليحة ṭalīḥa (syr.) ream of paper
طالح ṭāliḥ bed, evil, wicked, vicious, depraved, villainous
  طلس ṭalasa i (ṭals) to efface, obliterate, blot out (ھ s.th., esp. writing)
طلس ṭals effacement, obliteration
طلس ṭils effaced, obliterated, blotted out (inscription); illegible
  اطلس aṭlas  satin; (pl. اطالس aṭālis  ) atlas, volume of geographical maps
  طلسانةṭalasāna (eg.) coping (arch.)
 طيلسان ṭailasān pl. طيالسة ṭayālisa look up alphabetically
طلسم ṭilasm, ṭilasm pl. -āt, طالسم ṭalāsim  talisman, a seal, or the like, inscribed with mysterious words or characters; charm, magical combination of words; pl. طالسم cryptic characters
طلع ṭala‘a u (طلوع ṭulū‘, مطلع maṭla‘) to rise, ascend, come up (esp. of celestial bodies); to come into view, appear, show, become visible; to erupt (tooth), come up, sprout, break forth (plant); to go out, get out, come out, emerge (من from); to come suddenly (على upon s.o. or s.th.), overtake (على s.o., s.th.); ب عليه طلع to take or bring to s.o. s.th.; -- ṭala‘a a u (طلوع ṭulū‘) and ṭali‘a a to mount, ascend, climb, scale (ھ s.th.); to get (ھ on top of s.th., aboard s.th., into an automobile, on a train, etc.), board (ھ a train, etc.) III to read, peruse ( ھ s.th.); to study (ھ s.th.); to look (ھ at s.th.), 564 inspect, view (ھ s.th.); to acquaint (ھ s.o. ب with), make clear, elucidate, explain, expound, disclose (ه ب to s.o. s.th.), give an insight (ه ب to s.o. into), let s.o. (ه) in on s.th. (ب); to shine (ھ on s.th.; of the sun) IV to erupt (tooth), come up, sprout, break forth (plant); to acquaint (ه على s.o. with); to inform (ه s.o. من or على of or about), apprise, notify (عن or ه على s.o. of), let s.o. (ه) know (على s.th. or about s.th.), tell (ه على s.o. about); to demonstrate, point out, disclose, reveal,
 show (ه على to s.o. s.th.); to give an insight (ه على to s.o. into), let s.o. (ه) in on s.th. ( على) V to have an eye on s.th. (الى), wait, look out (الى for); to watch (الى for); to strive, be out (الى for), be bent (الى on); to look (الى at s.o.), regard (الى s.o.); to look attentively or closely, gaze, stare (ب or في at) VIII to look; to see, behold, view (على s.th.); to study, come to know (على s.th.), become acquainted (على with), become aware or cognizant (على of), obtain information (على about), be informed (على of); to inspect, examine (على s.th.), look into s.th. (على); to know (على s.th. or of s.th.), be aware, be cognizant (على of); to be (well) informed (على about), have (inside) information (على of), be (thoroughly) acquainted (على with), be privy (على to), be in on s.th. (على); to find out, discover, detect (على s.th.) X to seek to discover, explore, scout, reconnoiter (ھ s.th.); to inquire (ھ about s.th.); to arouse curiosity (ه in s.o.) │ رأيه استطلعه (ra’yahū) to consult s.o.) ask s.o.’s advice or opinion; خبره استطلع (kabarahū) to seek information about s.o. or s.th.
طلع ṭal‘ (also coll.) spadix or inflorescence of the palm tree; pollen
طلعة ṭal‘a look(s), appearance, aspect, outward appearance, guise
طلعة ṭula‘a inquisitive, nosy, curious
طالع ṭallā‘ striving, aspiring │ طالع واألنجد الثنايا (tanāyā, anjud) efficient, energetic, vigorous; التعرف الى طالع (ta‘arruf) curious, eager for news
طلوع ṭulū‘ rising, going up, ascending, ascension; rise (esp. of celestial bodies); appearance; climbing, ascent (of a mountain)
طليعة ṭalī‘a pl. مطالع maṭāli‘ front row, foremost rank, vanguard, avant-garde; pl. harbingers, precursors, presages, portents, first indications, symptoms; beginnings │ الطليعة في in front, at the head, in the lead
مطلع maṭla‘ pl. مطالع maṭāli‘ rise, time of rising (of celestial bodies); point of ascent; starting point, point, of departure; break (e.g., of day), dawn (e.g., of an era); onset, outset, start, beginning; introduction, preface, proem; opening
verses (of a poem); prelude; lookout; ladder, steps, stairs
مطالعة muṭāla‘a reading, perusal, study; (pl. -āt) (official) announcement │ قاعة المطالعة reading room, study hall
تطلع taṭallu‘ striving, aspiration, endeavor, aim; inquisitiveness, curiosity
اطالع iṭṭilā‘ pl. -āt study, examination, inspection; perusal; information, intelligence, knowledge; notice, cognizance; acquaintance, conversance, familiarity
استطالع istiṭlā‘ study, research, investigation, probing; scouting, reconnoitering, reconnaissance; exploration; suspense (in anticipation of s.th.) │ االستطالع حب ḥubb al-ist. inquisitiveness, curiosity;
of out (ḥubban) حبا في االستطالع reconnaissance طائرة االستطالع curiosity; plane
استطالعي istiṭlā‘ī research-, study- (in compounds), explorational, exploratory, fact-finding; scout-, reconnaissance- (in compounds) 565
طالع ṭāli‘ pl. طوالع ṭawāli‘  rising, ascending (esp. a celestial body); star of destiny; ascendant, nativity │ الطالع حسن ḥusn aṭ-ṭ. good fortune, lucky star, good luck; طالعي لحسن luckily for me, fortunately; الطالع سيء sayyi’ aṭ-ṭ. ill- starred, ill-fated, unfortunate, unlucky; hapless person; طالعه ساء (ṭāli‘uhū) he fell on evil days, he met with ill fortune
طالعة ṭāli‘a out-set, beginning, start
مطالع muṭāli‘ reader
متطلع mutaṭalli‘ curious, eager, waiting (الى for)
مطلع muṭṭali‘ viewer, observer; informed (على about, of), acquainted, familiar (على with), cognizant (على of), privy (على to)
طلق țaluqa u (طالقة ṭalāqa) to he cheerful, jovial, happy (face, countenance); -- ṭalaqāt u, ṭaluqat u (طالق ṭalāq) to be divorced, get a. divorce (said of a woman); -- pass ṭuliqat (طلق ṭalq) to be in labor II to set loose, release, set free,
 let go (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to leave, forsake (
ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to repudiate, divorce (زوجته zaujatahū one’s wife); to grant a divorce decree (على against a woman; said of the judge) │ نفسھا طلقت (nafsahā) she  dissolved her marriage, got a divorce; طلقت عليه (ṭulliqat) she was granted a divorce from him (by judicial decree) IV to undo, loose, disengage (ھ s.th.); to free, set free (ه ھ، s.o., s.th., also chem.), release, set at liberty, let go, let off, set loose (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to send out, dispatch (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to discharge (ھ a firearm), fire (ھ s.th., على at), shoot (على at); to utter, emit ( ھ a sound); to let burst forth (ھ laughter); to repudiate, divorce (زوجته zaujatahu one’s wife); to generalize (ھ s.th.); to apply (ھ s.th., e.g., an expression, a designation, على to) │ اسم عليه اطلق ... (isma) to name or call s.th.	, designate
s.th. as 	; على يطلق (yuṭlaqu) it has
(absolute) validity for ..., it applies to	;
الغارب على الحبل اطلق (ḥabla) to give free rein, impose no restraints, let things take their course; عقالھا من حربا اطلق (ḥarban) to unleash a war; بطنه الدواء اطلق (dawā’u baṭnahū) the medicine loosened his bowels; على الرصاص اطلق (raṣāṣa) to fire, shoot at; الريح الى رجليه اطلق (rijlaihi, rīḥ) to run away head over heels, to beat it; اطلق للريح ساقيه (sāqaihī) to run away head over heels, dash off like the wind, to bolt; اطلق االرادة to give a free hand (ل to s.o. في in s.th. or to do s.th.); سبيله اطلق to release s.o., set s.o. free, let s.o. go; السبيل اطلق لعبرته (li-‘abratihī) to let one’s tears flow freely; سراحه اطلق (sarāḥahū) to set s.o. at liberty, free s.o., release s.o. (from jail or custody); له العنان اطلق to give free rein to
s.o. or s.th., give vent to s.th.; لحيته اطلق (liḥyatahū) to let one’s beard grow; اطلق شنيعا اطالقا فيه لسانه to indulge in defamatory remarks about s.o., backbite s.o.; اطلق
ب السنتھم (alsinatahum) to incite s.o., e.g., a crowd, the mob (to boisterous demonstrations, emotional outbursts, and the like); سجيتھا على النفس اطلق (nafsa, sajīyatihā) he gave free rein to his instincts; على النار اطلق to open fire on, fire or shoot at; فى النار اطلق to set fire to, set s.th. on fire; ب يده اطلق (yadahū) to be openhanded with, bestow s.th. lavishly; ل) في يده اطلق) to give s.o. a free hand (in,
to do s.th.), give s.o. unlimited authority for; البالد في ايديھم اطلقوا (aidiyahum) they did as they pleased
with the country, they dealt high, handedly with the country V to brighten- beam, be radiant (with joy) │ وجھھا تطلق بابتسامة (wajhuhū bi-btisāma) her face broke into a radiant smile VII to be free, be loose, be set free (also chem.); to be emitted, emanate; to race along, sweep along, dash along; to hurry, rush (الى to); to be hurled off, be flung away; 566 to be discharged, be fired (firearm); to explode, go off; to burst forth, burst out, ring out (shouts, voices); to take off, start off, decamp, depart (من from); to start rolling, move off, pull out (train, vehicle); to go on, proceed on one’s way, to go away, leave; to go by, pass, elapse, (hours, years); to brighten, beam (face); with ب: to utter s.th. (tongue); with foll. imperf.: to set out to do s.th., begin or start with s.th.
│ يجري انطلق (yajrī) he set out in a hurry; مسرعا انطلق (musri‘an) he went away quickly, rushed away, dashed off; انطلق لسانه (lisānuhū) to utter words against; وجھه انطلق (wajhuhū) his face brightened, became cheerful X بطنه استطلق (baṭnuhu) he had a bowel movement
طلق ṭalq talc (min.); labor pains, travail; free, open, unconfined, unrestrained, unimpeded, uninhibited; free (من from), rid (من of) │ المحيا طلق ṭalq (ṭilq, ṭulq) al- muḥayyā with a happy, cheerful face, bright-faced; الوجه طلق ṭalq (ṭilq, ṭulq) al- wajh do.; اللسان طلق eloquent; الطلق الھواء في (hawā’) outdoors, in the open, under the open sky; اليدين طلق ṭ. al-yadain openhanded, liberal, generous
طلق ṭilq permissible, admissible
طلق ṭalaq pl. اطالق aṭlāq run, race, foot race; (pl. -āt, اطالق aṭlāq) shot (with a firearm) │ الطلق سريع rapid-fire (rifle, gun)
طلق لسان lisān ṭaliq a facile, fluent tongue
طلقة ṭalqa pl. ṭalaqāt divorce │ طلقة بالثالثة (talāta) definite divorce
do طلقة نارية │ shot -āt pl. ṭalaqa طلقة
طالق بالثالثة │ talak divorce, ṭalāq طالق
(talāta) definite divorce; رجعي طالق (raj‘ī)
 revocable (not definite) divorce; كتاب الطالق bill of divorce; بالطالق حلف to swear by all that’s holy
طليق ṭalīq pl. طلقاء ṭulaqā’  freed, released, set free, free; freedman; الطلقاء name of those Meccans who remained heathen until the surrender of Mecca
طالقة ṭalāqa ease, relaxedness; unrestraint; cheerfulness │ اللسان طالقة fluency, eloquence; الوجه طالقة ṭ. al-wajh cheerfulness of the face, gaiety
طليقة ṭalīqa repudiated or divorced woman, divorcee
طلوقة ṭalūqa pl. طالئق ṭalā’iq  stallion
اطالق iṭlāq freeing, liberation; setting loose, releasing, release; dispatch(ing); application (على to); generalization; اطالقا iṭlāqan absolutely │ اإلطالق على absolutely, unrestrictedly, without exception, in any respect, under any circumstances; اطالق على الرصاص (i. ar-raṣāṣ) the firing at s.th., the shooting of s.o.; السراح اطالق i. as- sarāḥ release (of s.o.); النيران) النار اطالق) opening of fire, shelling, gunning, cannonade
انطالق intilāq outburst, outbreak, eruption, explosion, release (e.g., of forces, of energies); unrestraint, liberty │ االنطالق نقطة nuqṭat al-inṭ. starting point, point of departure
طالق tāliq (of a woman) repudiated, divorced │ ثالثا طالق ھي (talātan) she is irrevocably divorced
مطلق muṭlaq free; unlimited, unrestricted, absolute; general; مطلقا muṭlaqan absolutely, unrestrictedly, without exception, in any respect, under any circumstances │ المطلق الحكم ذات الدول (duwal dāt al-ḥukm) the authoritarian states; السراح مطلق m. as-sarāḥ free, at large, at liberty
متطلق mutaṭalliq cheerful, jovial, happy (face)
مطلمة miṭlama rolling pin
طلمبة ṭulumba pl. -āt pump 567
طلمس ṭalmasa to frown, scowl, glower, lower
(طلو andطلى (طلو ṭalā i (ṭaly) to paint, daub (ب ھ s.th. with); to coat, overlay, plate (ھ ب
s.th. with) │ بالذھب ھ طل (dahab) to gild s.th.; بالكھرباء ھ طلى (kahrabā’) to galvanize, electroplate s.th.; بالميناه ھ طلى (mīnā’) to enamel s.th. VII ھذه عليه تنطل لم الحيلة (ḥīla) he wouldn’t be deceived by this ruse, this trick couldn’t fool him
طالء ṭilā’ coating, overlaying, plating; coat, covering (e.g., of sugar); (coat of) paint; make-up, face paint │ بالكھرباء الطالء (kahrabā’) galvanization, electroplating
طلى ṭalīy pleasant, becoming, nice, pretty
طالوة ṭalāwa beauty, gracefulness, grace, elegance
الطليان aṭ-ṭulyān the Italians
طليطلة ṭulaiṭila  Toledo (town in Spain)
طم ṭamma u (ṭamm, طموم ṭumūm) to overflow, flood, inundate, deluge, engulf (ھ s.th.)
VII pass. of I
طم ṭamm large quantity, huge amount; sea │ والرم الطم (rimm) tremendous riches
طامة ṭāmma pl. -āt (overwhelming) calamity, disaster
طماطة ṭumāṭa tomato
طماطم ṭamāṭim  (coll.; n. un. ة) tomatoes
طمأن ṭam’ana and طأمن ṭa’mana to calm, quiet, pacify, appease, assuage, soothe (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), set s.o.’s mind at rest; to fill s.o. (ه) with confidence (الى in), reassure (ه الى s.o. of or with regard to) II تطأمن taṭa’mana = طمن VI; IV اطمأن iṭma’anna to remain quietly (في in a place); to come to rest; to be or become still, quiet, calm, tranquil, at ease, composed, or reassured, feel assured, confident, or secure; to be sure, be certain (من or الى of s.th.); to have confidence, to trust (الى in), rely, depend ( الى on, upon); to make sure (على of s.th.) reassure o.s. (على of or with regard to); to find reassurance (الى in), derive confidence (الى from)
طمأنينة ṭuma’nīna calm, repose, serenity, peace, peacefulness, tranquility; reassurance, peace of mind, composure, calmness, equanimity; trust, confidence
اطمئنان iṭmi’nān calm, repose, serenity, peace, peacefulness, tranquility;
 reassurance, peace of mind, composure, calmness, equanimity; trust, confidence
مطمئن muṭma’inn (of land) low, low- lying; calm, quiet, at ease, composed, (re)assured, tranquil, serene, peaceable, peaceful, safe, secure; sure, certain; trusting, confident, of good hope
طمث ṭamata u and ṭamita a (ṭamt) to menstruate; -- ṭamata u i (ṭamt) to deflower (ھا a girl)
طمث ṭamt menstruation; menses, menstrual discharge
طمح ṭamaḥa a (طموح ṭumūḥ) to turn, be directed (الى to. toward; of the eye, of glances); to aspire (الى to, after), be bent ( الى on), strive, crave, long, yearn (الى for), covet (الى s.th.); to take away, remove (ب s.th.)
طموح ṭumūḥ striving, endeavor, aspiration, desire, craving, coveting, longing, yearning; ambition; high aspirations, loftiness of purpose
طموح ṭamūḥ high-aiming, high- aspiring, ambitious; craving, covetous, desirous, avid, eager
طماح ṭammāḥ high-aiming, high- aspiring, ambitious; craving, covetous, desirous, avid, eager
مطمح maṭmaḥ pl. مطامح maṭāmiḥ object of one’s longing or striving, (aspired) goal, aim, ambition, burning desire 568
طامح ṭāmiḥ high-aiming, high-aspiring; longing, yearning, craving, covetous, avid, eager
  طمر ṭamara u i (ṭamr) to bury, inter, cover with earth (ھ s.th., esp. a corpse); ṭamara i to cover up (ھ a thing), fill up (ھ a well)
طمر ṭimr pl. اطمار aṭmār old, tattered garment, fags, tatters
طمر ṭimirr fiery steed, race horse
مطمر miṭmar plumb line
مطمور maṭmūr subterranean, underground │ O المطمورات علم ‘ilm al- maṭmūrāt paleontology
مطمورة maṭmūra pl. مطامير maṭāmīr  subterranean storehouse for grain, underground granary, mattamore
 طمر II (eg.) to curry(comb), rub down (ھ a horse)
طمر ṭumār (eg.) currycomb
 طومار ṭūmār pl. طوامر ṭawāmir  look up alphabetically
طمس ṭamasa u i (ṭams, طموس ṭumūs) to be effaced, be obliterated, be erased, be wiped out, be blotted out, be destroyed, be eradicated; to lose animation, become lusterless (eye, glance); -- ṭamasa i (ṭams) to efface, obliterate, erase, expunge, blot out, wipe out, destroy, eradicate (على or ھ s.th.) VII to be effaced, be obliterated, be wiped out, be blotted out, become extinct
طمس ṭams effacement, obliteration
انطماس inṭimās incomprehencibleness, abstruseness
طامس ṭāmis extinct, dead; blurred, indistinct; incomprehensible, abstruse, recondite, obscure
طماطة ṭumāṭa tomato
طماطم ṭamāṭim  (coll.; n. un. ة) tomatoes
طمطماني ṭumṭumānī barbarous, barbaric, uneducated (esp. speech, pronunciation)
طمع ṭami‘a a (ṭama‘) to covet, desire (ب or في s.th.), wish, crave, strive (ب or في for), aspire (ب or في to, after); to expect (ب s.th., من from); to hope (في for); to be ambitious; -- ṭamu‘a u (طماعة ṭamā‘a) to be covetous, avid, greedy, avaricious II to make (ه s.o.) desirous (في of), fill (ه s.o.) with greed (في for); to allure, tempt, entice (ه s.o.); to give (ه s.o.) hope (في of), hold out hopes (ه to s.o., في of s.th.), embolden ( ه s.o.), encourage (ه في s.o. to do s.th.) IV = II
طمع ṭama‘ pl. اطماع aṭmā‘ greed, greediness, avidity, covetousness; ambitious desire, ambition; object of desire
طماع ṭammā‘ avid, greedy, covetous, desirous; avaricious, grasping
طماعية ṭamā‘īya avidity, greed; cupidity, avarice
مطمع maṭma‘ pl. مطامع maṭāmi‘ coveted object; covetousness, craving, desire;
 hope, expectation; pl. ambitious designs, ambitions, schemes, aspirations, desires
مطمعة maṭma‘a lure, enticement, temptation
مطماع miṭmā‘ filled with greed; obsessed by ambition, overambitious
طمن II to quiet, calm, appease, pacify, allay, assuage, soothe (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); see also طأمن ṭa’'mana under طمأن VI to be low; to become low, sink, subside; to calm down, be or become quiet, calm, still, to abate; to be bent over, to stoop
طمان ṭamān calm, quiet, repose, peace, peacefulness, serenity, tranquility; reassurance, ease, calmness, peace of mind, composure, equanimity; trust, confidence 569
تطمين taṭmīn appeasement, mollification, calming, assuaging, soothing
متطامن mutaṭāmin low
طمى ṭumūw), طمو( u ṭamā طمي( طما and طمو(
ṭamā i (ṭamy) to flow over
طمي ṭamy (eg., syr.) alluvial mud, silt, alluvium
طن مسجل │ ton aṭnān اطنان pl. ṭunn طن 
(musajjal) register ton
  طن ṭanna i (طنين ṭanīn) to ring, sound, peal, jingle, tinkle (bell); to hum, buzz, drone (insect); to ring (ears) II = I
طنين ṭanīn ring(ing), peal, jingle, tinkle, tinkling (of a bell); buzz(ing), hum(ming), drone (of an insect); ringing (of the ears)
طنان ṭannān ringing, sounding, pealing, jingling, tinkling; resounding, reverberating, echoing; humming, buzzing, droning; whistle, buzzer (of a kettle); famous, renowned, celebrated
طنب II to remain, abide, stay to live, settle down (ب in, at a place) IV to be excessive (في in), overdo, exaggerate (في s.th.); to brag
طنب ṭunub pl. اطناب aṭnāb tent rope; sinew, tendon │ اطنابه شد (šadda) to stay, sojourn, reside; على اطنابه ضرب to settle down, take up permanent residence in a
place; في اطنابه ضرب to take root, prevail (at a place)
اطناب iṭnāb exaggeration; fussiness, circumstantiality, prolixity, lengthiness, verbosity
طنبور ṭunbūr pl. طنابير ṭanābīr  a long- necked, stringed instrument resembling the mandolin; a device used to raise water for irrigation, Archimedean screw; drum, cylinder (techn.)
طنبوري ṭunbūrī player of the طنبور طنبوشة ṭanbūša pl. -āt paddle box (of a paddle
steamer)
طنجة ṭanja  Tangier
طنجي ṭanjī from Tangier; native of Tangier, Tangerine
طنجرة ṭanjara pl. طناجر ṭanājir  (copper) casserole, saucepan, skillet
طنطا ṭanṭā Tanta (city in N Egypt)
طنطن ṭanṭana to ring, sound, peal, jingle, tinkle (bell); to hum, buzz, drone (insect); to clang, boom, roar, rumble; to blare out (ب s.th.)
طنطنة ṭanṭana ring(ing), peal, jingle, tinkle, tinkling (of a bell); hum(ming), buzz(ing), drone (of an insect); clangor, boom, roar
طنف ṭunuf (ṭanaf, ṭunf) pl. طنوف ṭunūf, اطناف aṭnāf top, summit, peak (of a mountain); ledge, molding, eaves
طنفسة ṭinfisa, ṭanfasa, ṭunfusa pl. طنافس ṭanāfis 
velvet-like carpet, mockado carpet
طه a group of letters opening the 20th sura;
T□āhā a Muslim masculine proper name
طھر ṭahara, ṭahura u (ṭuhr, طھارة ṭahāra) to be clean, pure; -- ṭaharat, ṭahurat (of a woman) to be clean (as opposed to menstruating) II to clean, cleanse, deterge, expurgate, purge, purify, chasten (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to disinfect, sterilize (ھ s.th.); to dredge (ھ e.g., a canal); to circumcise (ه s.o.) III to circumcise (ه s.o.) V to clean o.s., cleanse o.s., perform an ablution
طھر ṭuhr cleanness, purity; chastity
طھور ṭahūr circumcision; cleansing, purging, detergent; clean, pure
 طھارة ṭahāra cleanness, cleanliness, purity; cultic purity (Isl. Law); chastity; holiness, sanctity, saintliness; 570 circumcision │ الذيل طھارة ṭ. ad-dail innocence; probity, uprightness, integrity, honesty
مطھر maṭhar purgatory (Chr.)
مطھرة maṭhara pl. مطاھر maṭāhir  wash- room, lavatory, toilet
طھر taṭhīr cleaning, cleansing, purging, expurgation, purification; disinfection; purgation, use of aperients; dredging; circumcision
تطھيري taṭhīrī cleaning, cleansing, detergent
طاھر ṭāhir pl. اطھار aṭhār clean, pure; chaste, modest, virtuous │ الذمة طاھر ṭ. ad- dimma upright, righteous, honest; طاھر الذيل ṭ. ad-dail innocent, pure, unblemished, blameless, upright, righteous, honest
مطھر muṭahhir pl. -āt a detergent (esp. anticeptic); an anticeptic, a disinfectant
مطھر muṭahhar pure, immaculate طھران ṭihrān  Teheran (capital of Iran) طھق V to despise, detect, abhor, loathe (من
s.th.)
مطھم muṭahham of perfect beauty (esp. as an epithet of noble horses)
طھو) and طھا (طھي ṭahā u and يطھى yaṭhā (طھو ṭahw, طھي ṭuhīy, ṭahy, طھاية ṭahāya) to cook (ھ s.th.); to stew (ھ s.th.); to braise ( ھ s.th.); to broil, fry (ھ s.th.); to bake (ھ s.th.)
طھى ṭuhan cooked dish, cooked meal
طھاية ṭihāya cook’s trade
مطھى maṭhan kitchen
طاه ṭāhin pl. طھاة ṭuhāh cook طواشي ṭawāšī pl. طواشية ṭawāšiya eunuch طواية ṭawwāya frying pan
  طابة ṭāba look up alphabetically
  طوب II to beatify (ه s.o.; Chr.)
طوبى ṭūbā blessedness, beatitude; Beatitude (title of honor of a patriarch; Chr.)
تطويب taṭwīb beatification (Chr.)
 طوب ṭub (coll.; n. un. ة) brick(s) │ احمر طوب (aḥmar) baked brick(s); مفرغ طوب (mufarrag) hollow tile(s), air brick(s); ني طوب (nayy) unburned, sun-dried briek(s)
طواب ṭawwāb brick burner, brick- maker, tile-maker
طوبجي ṭōbjī, (eg.) ṭobgī pl. -īya artillerist, artilleryman
طوبجية ṭōbjīya artillery
طوبه ṭūba the fifth month of the Coptic calendar
طوح) طاح) ṭāḥa u (ṭauḥ) to perish, die; to loss one’s way, go astray, stray, wander about; to fall; to throw, cast, fling, hurl, toss, carry away, sweep away (ب s.o., s.th.) II to cause to or let perish (ه or ب s.o.); to endanger, expose to peril (ه or ب s.o.); to throwaway, toss away, hurl away (ب s.th.); to throw, cast, hurl, toss, fling (ب الى
s.o. into); to carry away, transport (ب الى
s.o. to, into); to move, induce, tempt (ه s.o., الى to s.th., to do s.th.) │ به طرحت الطوائح fate dealt him severe blows IV to drop, discard (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), shed (ھ s.th.); to let s.th. (ب) be swept away; to carry away, tear away, rip away (ب s.th.); to chop off (ھ s.th., esp. the head) V to fall, drop, be thrown, be tossed; to stray, wander about; to sway, reel, stagger
طوائح ṭawā’iḥ  adversities, blows of fate
مطوحة muṭawwiḥa pl. -āt adventure طود VII to rise in the air, soar up طود ṭaud pl. اطواد aṭwād (high,
towering) mountain 571
منطاد munṭād pl. مناطيد manāṭīd  balloon, blimp; zeppelin, dirigible │ مقيد منطاد (muqayyad) captive balloon, kite balloon; O ثابت ھوائي منطاد (hawā’ī) barrage balloon
  طورII to develop, further, advance, promote ( ھ s.th.) V to develop, evolve; to change; to race (motor)
طور ṭaur pl. اطوار aṭwār one time (= Fr. fois; state, condition; limit, bound; stage, degree; phase (also phys., esp. el.) │ طورا طور بعد time and again, again and again; طورا -- طورا or طورا -- حينا sometimes --
 sometimes, at times – at times; عن خرج طوره to lose one’s self-control, become upset; طوره عن اخرجه (akrajahū) to upset, discompose, disconcert s.o.; األطوار غريب of odd behavior, eccentric
طور │ mountain aṭwār اطوار pl. ṭūr طور Mount sīnā ṭ. طور سينا and sīnā’ ṭ. سيناء Sinai
طوري ṭūrī wild
طوار ṭawār sidewalk
طوراني ṭūrānī wild; Turanian
تطور taṭawwur pl. -āt development; evolution; pl. -āt stages of development, evolutionary phases, developments │ قابل التطور developable, capable of development or evolution
تطوري taṭawwurī evolutional, evolutionary │ تطورية نظرية (naẓarīya) theory of evolution, evolutionism
 طار ṭār (= اطار iṭār), طارة ṭāra hoop, ring; tire; frame; wheel; tambourine
اطر see iṭār اطار 
 طورية ṭūrīya look up alphabetically
طوربيد ṭurbīd pl. -āt, طرابيد ṭarābīd  torpedo
طورية ṭūrīya (eg.) pl. □ طواري ṭawārī hoe, mattock
طوزلق (Turk. tozluk) gaiter(s), legging(s)
طوس II to adorn, decorate, deck out (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.)
طاس ṭās pl. -āt round, shallow drinking cup made of metal, drinking vessel; finger bowl
طاس ṭāsa pl. -āt round, shallow drinking cup made of metal, drinking vessel │ التحمير طاسة frying pan; O طاسة التصادم ṭ. at-taṣādum buffer (railroad)
ṭawāwīs  طواويس pl. ṭāwūs طاووس
peacock
مطوس muṭawwas ornate, ostentatiously made-up
طوش II to castrate, emasculate (ه s.o.)
ṭawāšiya طواشية pl. ṭawāšī طواشي
eunuch
طوع) طاع) ṭā‘a u (ṭau‘) to obey (ل or ه
s.o.), be obedient (ل or ه to s.o.) II to
render obedient, bring into subjection, subdue, subject, subjugate (ه s.o.) │ طوعت نفسه له (nafsuhū) (lit.: his soul permitted him, made it easy or feasible for him, i.e.) he allowed himself to do s.th. (ھ), he had no qualms about doing s.th. (ھ), he did not hesitate to do s.th. (ھ) III to comply with or accede to s.o.’s (ھ) wishes (على or في in, with regard to), yield, submit, be obedient (ه to s.o., على or في in), obey (ه s.o., على or في in); to be at s.o.’s (ه) command (of a faculty, skill, etc.); to consent, assent (في to s.th.) IV to obey, follow (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), be obedient, submit, yield (ه ھ to s.o., to s.th.), comply (ه ھ، with s.o.’s wishes, with s.th.), accede (ه ھ، to s.o.’s wishes, to s.th.) V to do voluntarily (ل or ب or ھ s.th.), volunteer ( ل or ب or ھ for, in, to do s.th.); to enlist, volunteer (mil.) │ خيرا تطوع (kairan) to perform a good deed voluntarily VII to obey, follow (ل s.o., s.th.), be obedient, submit, yield, accede (ل to), comply (ل with) X to be able (ھ to do s.th.), be in a 572 position to do, to get, to carry out, or to take upon o.s. (ھ s.th.), be capable (ھ of s.th., ان of doing s.th.)
طوع ṭau‘ obedience; voluntariness, spontaneity (in connection with a legally relevant action, esp. a delict; Isl. Law); (for m. and f.) obedient, compliant, submissive; طوعا ṭau‘an voluntarily, of one’s own free will, of one’s own accord
│ كرھا او طوعا (karhan) willingly or unwillingly, willy-nilly, whether I (you, etc.) will it or not; العنان طوع tractable, docile, amenable; يده طوع ṭau‘a yadihī under s.o.’s thumb, at s.o.’s beck and call; ايدينا طوع ھو (ṭau‘a aidīnā) he is at our beck and call, he is in our power; طوع امرك/ṭau‘a amrika at your disposal
طوعيا ṭau‘īyan voluntarily, of one’s own free will, of one’s own accord
طيع (ṭayyi‘) obedient, compliant, submissive
طاعة ṭā‘a obedience, compliance, submissiveness; (pl. -āt) pious deed (Isl. Law) │ الطاعة بيت bait aṭ-ṭ. the husband’s house to which a woman, in case of unlawful desertion, must return (Isl. Law); والطاعة السمع as-sam‘ū wa-ṭ-ṭā‘atu I hear
 and obey! at your service! Very well! سمعا وطاعة sam‘an wa-ṭā‘atan do.
طواعية ṭawā‘īya obedience │ طواعية عن voluntarily, of one’s own free will, of one’s own accord
مطواع miṭwā‘ obedient, compliant
تطويع taṭwī‘ diploma of the Great Mosque of Tunis
اطاعة iṭā‘a obedience
تطوع taṭawwu‘ voluntariness; volunteering; voluntary service (في in a branch of the armed forces); service as an unsalaried trainee, voluntary traineeship
استطاعة istiṭā‘a ability, capability, faculty; possibility
طائع ṭā’i‘ obedient, compliant, submissive │ كارھا او طائعا willingly or unwillingly, whether I (you, etc.) will it or not
مطوع muṭawwa‘ pl. -ūn holder of the diploma issued by the Great Mosque of Tunis; -- muṭṭawwi‘ volunteer (also mil.); unsalaried trainee
مطاوع muṭāwi‘ obedient, compliant, submissive; yielding, pliable, pliant; المطاوع the reflexive, frequently = the passive (gram.) │ مطاوع حديد mild steel
مطيع muṭī‘ obedient, compliant
متطوع mutaṭawwi‘ pl. ة volunteer (also
mil.); unsalaried trainee
قدر │ feasible possible, mustaṭā‘ مستطاع as possible, as far as l-m. qadra المستطاع بقدر )على قدر( المستطاع feasible; is it as far do.
طوف) طاف) ṭāfa u (ṭauf, طواف ṭawāf, طوفان ṭawafān) to go about, walk about, ride about, travel about, move about, rove about, wander about, run around (ھ in s.th.), tour (ھ s.th.); to go, walk, ride, run ( ب حول، around s.th.), circumambulate (
ب حول، s.th.); to make the rounds, walk around (على among people); to circle, circuit, compass (ب حول، s.th.); to roam, rove, range (ب s.th.); to show around, guide (ب s.o.); to familiarize o.s., acquaint
o.s. (y with); to become acquainted (ب with s.o., with s.th.), come to know (ب s.o., s.th.); - (ṭauf) to appear to s.o. (ب) in
his sleep; to come (على upon s.o.), afflict ( على s.o.); to overflow, leave its banks (river); to swim, float, drift II to go about, walk about, stroll about, ride about, travel about (في in), tour (في s.th.); to go or walk around s.th. (ب), circle, circumambulate ( ب s.th.); to show around, guide (ب or ه s.o.); to let (ب s.th.) roam (ھ s.th.), let (ب s.th.) make the rounds 573 (ب in), let one’s eyes (ب) wander; to perform the circumambulation of the Kaaba (ṭawāf) IV to surround, encompass, encircle, circumscribe (ب s.th.) V to move about, rove, roam, wander, walk about
طوف ṭauf round, circuit, beat; low wall, enclosure; (pl. اطواف aṭwāf) patrol; raft made of inflated waterskins tied together
طواف ṭawāf round, circuit, beat; round trip, round-trip excursion; roundtrip flight; circumambulation of the Kaaba (as part of the Islamic pilgrimage ceremonies)
طواف ṭawwāf ambulant, itinerant, migrant, roving, wandering; going the rounds, making the circuit, walking the beat; (pl. ة) mounted rural mail carrier (Eg.) │ الطوافة محطة maḥaṭṭat aṭ-ṭ. (Eg.) circuit stations which have the mail delivered by mounted rural mail carriers
طوافة ṭawwāfa pl. -āt patrol boat, coastal patrol vessel (employed by the Egyptian Coast Guard)
طوفان ṭūfān flood, inundation, deluge
مطاف maṭāf riding about, traveling, touring; round trip │ الى المطاف به (انتھى) آل to end with, wind up with, arrive eventually at; المطاف خاتمة the end of the matter, the final issue, the upshot of it
تطواف taṭwāf traveling, touring, wandering, itineration, roving life
طائف ṭā’if ambulant, itinerant, migrant, roving, wandering; one going the rounds or making the circuit or walking the beat; one performing the ṭawāf │ طائف به طاف he had a sudden impulse or urge; عليه طاف القاسي القدر من طائف (qadar) tragedy befell him, he met with a harsh fate
الطائف aṭ-ṭā’if Taif (town in S Hejaz)
طائفة ṭā’ifa pl. طوائف ṭawā’if  part, portion; number; troop, band, group;
 swarm, drove, bevy, covey; people; class; sect, denomination; confession, communion; party, faction; religious minority │ O االحساسية الطائفة (iḥsāsīya) the impressionists; الطوائف ملوك princelings, petty kings
طائفي ṭā’ifī factional, sectarian, denominational, confessionalism
طائفية ṭā’ifīya sectarianism, denominationalism; confessionalism
مطوف muṭawwif pl. -ūn pilgrims’ guide in Mecca
طوق) طاق) ṭāqa u (ṭauq) to be able, be in a position (ھ to do s.th.), be capable (ھ of, of doing s.th.); to be able to bear or stand ( ھ s.th.), bear, stand, sustain, endure (ھ s.th.) II to put a collar or necklace (طوقا ṭauqan) around s.o.’s neck; to hoop (ھ s.th., e.g., a barrel); to surround, clasp, enwrap, ring, encompass (ه ھ، ب s.o., s.th. with), encircle (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), form or throw a circle or cordon (ه ھ، around s.o., around s.th.), enclose (ھ s.th.); to play (ھ about, e.g., a smile about the lips), flit (ھ across s.th.) │ بذراعيه طوقه (bi-dirā‘aihī) to take s.o. in one’s arms, embrace, hug, clasp s.o.; ب عنقه طوق (‘unuqahū) to present s.o. with, bestow upon s.o. s.th. IV
= I (ھ على، s.th., to do s.th., of s.th. or of doing s.th.); to master (ھ a method) │ لم صبرا يطق lam yuṭiq ṣabran be could not stand or bear it, he could not control himself; يطاق ال شيء (yuṭāqu) s.th. unbearable, s.th. intolerable
طوق ṭauq ability, faculty, power, strength, potency, capability, aptitude, capacity; endurance; (pl. اطواق aṭwāq) necklace; neckband, ruff, collar; hoop, circle │ للنجاة طوق (najāh) life 574 buoy; طوقه عن الحزن اخرجه (akrajahū l-ḥuznu) grief drove him out of his mind
طوقي ṭauqī collar-like, loop-shaped, ring-shaped, annular
طاق ṭāq pl. –āt, طيقان ṭīqān arch (arch.); (pl. -āt) stratum, layer
طاقة ṭāqa pl. -āt window
طاقة ṭāqa pl. -āt ability, faculty, capability, aptitude, capacity, power, strength, potency; energy (phys., etc.);
capacity (of a technical apparatus); bunch, bouquet (of flowers) │ الطاقة في (with foll. maṣdar) it is possible to ...; الطاقة قدر qadra ṭ-ṭ. as far as possible, in the best way possible; طاقته قدر على according to his capability; مدخرة طاقة (muddakara) accumulated energy; potential (phys.); الذرية الطاقة (darrīya) atomic energy, atomic power; انتاجية طاقة (intājīya) productive power, productional capacity, output capacity
طاقية look up alphabetically
تطويق taṭwīq pl. -āt encirclement, encompassment, enclosure, surrounding, ringing
اطاقة iṭāqa ability, faculty, aptitude, power, capability, capacity
مطوق muṭawwaq ringdove
مطاق muṭāq bearable, endurable, tolerable
طوكيو tōkiyō Tokyo
 طول) طال) ṭāla u (ṭūl) to be or become long; to last long; to lengthen, grow longer, extend, be protracted, become drawn out; to surpass, excel (على or ه s.o.) │ به طال حتى الزمن (zamanu) it took a long time before he ...; ھذا بي يطول this will (would) take me too long; قصر او الزمن طال (zamanu, qaṣura) sooner or later, before long II to make long or longer, lengthen, elongate, stretch out, prolong, extend, protract (ھ s.th.); to be very elaborate, very detailed, very exhaustive, longwinded, prolix; to grant a delay or
respite (ل to s.o.) │ عليه باله طول (bālahū) to be patient with III to keep putting off (ه في
s.o. in or with s.th.); to vie for power, greatness or stature, contend, compete (ه with s.o.), rival, emulate (ه s.o.) IV to make long or longer, lengthen, elongate, stretch out, extend, prolong, protract, draw out (ھ or من s.th.); to take too long, find no end │ عليه اطال to keep s.o. waiting a long time; لسانه اطال (lisānahū) to speak in a forward manner, be pert, saucy, insolent in speech; النظر اطال (naẓara) he kept staring at him; الوقوف اطال he stayed a long time VI to become long, be lengthened, be extended, be prolonged; to stretch up, stretch o.s.; to stretch (الى for), crane one'.
 neck (الى at); to attack (على s.o.); to become insolent, get fresh (على with s.o.); to be insolent enough, have the cheek (ل to do s.th.); to dare do s.th. (ب), presume ( ب s.th.), pretend (ب to s.th.); to arrogate to
o.s. (الى a rank) │ برأسه تطاول (bi-ra’sihī) to bear one’s head high (with pride) X to be or become long; to be or become overbearing, presumptuous, display an arrogant behavior (على toward)
طالما ṭālamā and لطالما la-ṭālamā how often! often, frequently (with foll. verbal clause) │ ان طالما (anna) while, as, the more so as
صاحب الحول │ power might, ṭaul طول Almighty the al-ḥaul) (ṣ. والطول
طول ṭūl pl. اطوال aṭwāl length; size, height, tallness │ االناة طول ṭ. al-anāh long- suffering, longanimity, forbearance, patience; النظر طول ṭ. an-naẓar farsightedness, hyperopia; الطول خط kaṭṭ
aṭ-ṭ. geographical longitude, degree of 575 longitude, meridian; بالطول and طوال lengthwise, longitudinally; طول ṭūla (prep.) during, throughout, … long, e.g., المدة ھذه طول (mudda) during this period, during all this time, النھار طول (nahār) all day (long); ما طول as long as; طول على (with foll. genit.) along, along, side of; على طول (eg.) straight ahead; straightway, directly; at last, finally, after all; طول في وعرضھا البالد (wa-‘arḍihā) throughout the country, all over the country; طولك في انا (eg.) have mercy on me!
طولي ṭūlī of length, linear, longitudinal
│طولي خط (kaṭṭ) geographical longitude, degree of longitude, meridian
طول ṭuwwal a long-legged waterfowl
طوال ṭawwāla, ṭiwala (prep.) during, throughout; along, alongside of
طويل ṭawīl pl. طوال ṭiwāl long; large, big, tall; high; الطويل name of a poetical meter; طويال ṭawīlan long (adv.), a long time │ األجل طويل ṭ. al-ajal longterm, long- dated; األناة طويل ṭ. al-anāh long-suffering forbearing, patient; الباع طويل mighty, powerful; capable, efficient; generous, liberal, openhanded; الروح طويل ṭ. ar-rūḥ long-suffering, forbearing, patient; طويل
القامة tall; اللسان طويل insolent, impertinent, pert, saucy
طوال ṭuwāl long
طوالة ṭuwāla pl. -āt stable
طيلة ṭīlata (prep.) during, throughout,
… long
طوالني ṭaulānī measured lengthwise, longitudinal
اطول aṭwal , f. طولى longer, larger, bigger, taller; extremely tall, very long
تطويل taṭwīl lengthening, elongation, stretching, extension, prolongation, protraction; elaborateness, exhaustiveness, prolixity, long-windedness
اطالة iṭāla lengthening, elongation, stretching, extension, prolongation, protraction; elaborateness, exhaustiveness, prolixity, long-windedness
استطالة istiṭāla overbearing attitude, haughtiness, presumptuousness, arrogance
طائل ṭā’il long; huge, immense, ample, enormous (of funds); use, avail; might, power, force │ الصولة طائل ṭ. aṣ-ṣaula mighty, powerful, forceful; طائل دون and ال فيه) تحته طائل) (ṭā’ila) of no use, of no avail, useless, unavailing, futile; بطائل فاز ما to accomplish nothing, be unsuccessful, fail
طائلة ṭā’ila might, power, force; vengeance, revenge, retribution, retaliation │ القانون طائلة تحت وقع to be subject to punishment by law; طائلة  تحت الموت (ṭ. il-maut) under penalty of death
مطول muṭawwal elaborate, detailed, exhaustive, circumstantial
متطاول mutatāwil long-extended, long- stretched, long-protacted, prolonged, lengthy
مستطيل mustaṭīl long, oblong, elongate(d), long-stretched; protracted, prolonged, long drawn out; a rectangle, an oblong; a saucy, presumptuous person
 طاولة look up alphabetically
طولكرم Tulkarm (town in NW Jordan) طومار ṭūmār pl. طوامير ṭawāmīr  roll, scroll الطونة نھر nahr aṭ-ṭūna the Danube river
 طونوالطة (It. tonnellata) ṭōnolāṭa ton
طوى ṭawā i (طي ṭayy) to fold, fold up, fold in, fold over, fold under, roll up (ھ s.th.); to shut, close (ھ a book); to keep secret, secrete, conceal, hide (ھ s.th.); to harbor, hold, contain (ھ s.th.); to swallow up, envelop, wrap up. Enwrap 576 (ه s.o.; of the dark of night); to settle finally, bury (ه the past), have done with s.th. in the past ( ھ); to cross, traverse (ھ s.th., esp. a country); to cover quickly (ھ the way, the distance, الى to); to spend, pass (ھ a period of time) ; to possess o.s. take possession ( ھ of), appropriate (ھ s.th.); pass. على طوى ṭuwiya ‘alā (= to be folded around or over, i.e.) to bear (within itself), harbor, contain, involve s.th. │ طيا األرض طوى (l-arḍa ṭayyan) to rush through a country; .l.~ .s). (biodlaAu) to be finished, be done, come to an end, finish; فيه بما البساط طوى to settle an affair once and for all, wind up an affair; على جوانحه طوى (jawāniḥahū) to harbor s.th., conceal s.th. in one’s heart; على (كشحا) كشحه طوى (kašḥahū, kašḥan) and على صدره طوى (ṣadrahū) to harbor or look (a secret) in one’s bosom, keep s.th. secret, secrete, conceal, hide s.th.; طوى صفحته (ṣafḥatahū) to have done with s.th., be through with s.th., give up, abandon s.th.; الى الطريق طوى to hurry or rush to; للكاتب السجل طي الماضى طوى (l-māḍiya ṭayya s-sijilli) to break with the past, let bygones be bygones; -- طوي ṭawiya a (طوى ṭawan) to be hungry, suffer hunger, starve IV = ṭawiya V to coil (snake) VII to be folded, be folded up, in, over, or under, be rolled up, be turned (over) (page, leaf), be shut (book, etc.); to go by, pass, elapse (time); to disappear, vanish; to be covered (distance); to be bidden, be concealed ( تحت under), be enveloped, be wrapped ( تحت in); to contain, comprise, encompass, comprehend, embrace, involve, include ( على s.th.); to harbor, nurse, bear (ھ feelings, esp. hatred, love) │ نفسه على انطوى to withdraw within o.s., be self-centered, be introverted
طي ṭayy concealment, biding; (pl. اطواء aṭwā’) fold, pleat │ طيه ṭayyahū and ھذا طي (ṭayya) herein enclosed, herewith (in a letter); الغيب طي في (ṭ. il-gaib) secretly, covertly; الكتمان طي (في) تحت (ṭ. il-kitmān)
under the seal of secrecy; اطواء في (with foll. genit.) in
طية ṭayya pl. -āt fold, pleat │ بين حمل طياته involve, comprise, contain
طية ṭīya intention, design │ (ذھب) مضى لطيته he went to his destination; he left in order to do what he had in mind; he went his way
طوى ṭawan hunger; mat │ الطوى على on an empty stomach, without having eaten
طوية ṭawīya pl. طوايا ṭawāyā fold, pleat; innermost thoughts, real conviction, true mind; intention, design; conscience │ سليم الطوية guileless artless; طوايا في (with foll. genit.) inside, within, in, amid
طواية ṭawāya pl. -āt frying pan
مطوى maṭwan pl. مطاو maṭāwin pocket knife, penknife; pl. folds, pleats │ في مطاوى (with foll. genit.) inside, within, in, amid; مطاويه في inwardly, at heart, in his bosom
مطواة miṭwah pocket knife, penknife
│ (psych.) introversion inṭiwā’ انطواء do. (nafs) االنطواء على النفس
انطوائي inṭiwā’ī introverted (psych.)
l-baṭn ṭ. طاو البطن │ starved ṭāwin طاو
starved, lean, emaciated
مطوي maṭwīy folded up, infolded, rolled up, etc.; على مطوي bearing (within itself), harboring, containing, involving s.th. │ على الضلوع مطوى harboring s.th. in one’s bosom
منطو munṭawin: نفسه على منطو self- absorbed, low-spirited, depressed
 طيب) طاب) ṭāba i (ṭīb, طيبة ṭība) to be good, pleasant, agreeable; to be or become 577 delightful, delicious; to please (ل s.o.), be to s.o.’s (ل) liking; to be or become ripe, to ripen; to regain health, recover, recuperate, convalesce │ ليلتكم طابت (lailatukum) may your night be pleasant! good night! نفسه طابت (nafsuhū) he was gay, cheerful, cheery, in good spirits, he felt happy; عن نفسا طاب (nafsanl) to give up s.th. gladly, renounce s.th. willingly; طابت اليه نفسه (nafsuhū) he had a liking for it, it was to his taste II to make (ھ s.th.) good, pleasant, agreeable, delightful, delicious,
 or sweet, to sweeten (ھ s.th.); to scent, perfume (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to spice, season ( ھ food), mull (ھ wine); to sanitate, improve (ھ air, drinking water); to heal, cure (ه s.o.); to massage (ه s.o.) │ طيب خاطره to mollify, soothe, placate, conciliate s.o., set s.o.’s mind at rest; طيب ثراه ﷲ (tarāhu) may God make his earth light (a eulogy added after mentioning the name of a pious deceased) III to joke, jest, banter, make fun (ه with s.o.) IV to make ( ھ s.th.) good, pleasant, agreeable, delightful, delicious, or sweet, to sweeten (ھ s.th.) V to perfume o.s. X استطاب and استطيب istaṭyaba to find or deem (ھ s.th.) good, pleasant, agreeable, delightful, delicious, sweet; to like (ھ s.th.), be fond ( ھ of)
طيب ṭīb goodness; (pl. طيوب ṭuyūb) scent, perfume │ العرق طيب ṭ. al-‘irq noble birth, noble descent; الطيب جوز jauz aṭ-ṭ. nutmeg
طيب ṭayyib good; pleasant, agreeable; delicious; gay; well-disposed, friendly, kindly; well, in good health │ الخلق طيب ṭ. al-kulq good-natured, genial; الريحة طيب sweet-smelling, fragrant, sweet-scented; العرق طيب ṭ. a1-‘irq highborn, of noble descent; النفس طيب ṭ. an-nafs gay, cheerful, cheery, in high spirits
طيبات ṭayyibāt nice, pleasant things; gustatory delights, pleasures of the table
طيبة ṭība goodness; good nature, geniality │ خاطر طيبة عن gladly, most willingly, with pleasure
طوبى ṭūbā blessedness, beatitude; Beatitude (title of honor of a patriarch; Chr.)
طياب ṭayāb, ṭiyāb (eg.) north wind
طياب ṭayyāb pl. -ūn masseur
اطيب aṭyab  better; -- pl. اطايب aṭāyib  the best parts (of s.th.); pleasures, comforts, amenities; delicacies, dainties
مطايب maṭāyib  comforts, amenities (e.g., of life)
مطايبة muṯāyaba pl. -āt banter, joke, jest, teasing remark
طائب ṭā’ib unobjectionable (ل for; Isl.
Law)
مطيب muṭayyab bouquet, bunch (of flowers)
 طيبة ṭība  Thebes
طيح) طاح) ṭaḥa i (ṭaiḥ) to perish, die II to lose (
ھ s.th.)
طير) طار) ṭāra i (طيران ṭayarān) to fly; to fly away, fly off, take to the wing; to hasten, hurry, rush, fly (الى to); to be in a state of commotion, be jubilant, exult, rejoice; ب طار to snatch away, carry away, carry off (s.o., s.th.) │ بخياله طار (bi- kayālihī) to let one’s imagination wander to; الناس في صيت له طار (ṣīt) his fame spread among people, he became well-known; طائره طار (ṭā’iruhū) to become angry, blow one’s top; عقله طار (‘aqluhū) to lose one’s mind, go crazy; شعاعا (روحه) فؤاده طار (fu’āduhū, rūḥuhū ša‘ā‘an) his mind became confused, he became all mixed up; فرحا طار (faraḥan) to be beside o.s. with joy, be overjoyed; بلبه طار (bi-lubbihī) to drive s.o. out of his mind; بصوابه طار
(bi-ṣawābihī) to make s.o. unconscious II to make or let fly (ه ,ھ s.o., s.th.), to fly, send up (ھ s.th., e.g., a balloon, a kite); to pass on 578 promptly, dispatch posthaste, forward without delay, rush, shoot (ھ الى s.th. to, esp. a report, a message); to knock out (ھ s.th., e.g., an eye, a tooth) │ طير رأسه (ra’sahū) to chop off s.o.’s head, behead s.o. IV to make or let fly (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), to fly (ھ s.th.): to blow away (ھ s.th.; of the wind); to make (ھ s.th.) disappear at once, dispel (ھ s.th.) V to see an evil omen (من or ب in) VI to be scattered, be dispersed, scatter, disperse, spread, diffuse; to be exuded, rise (fragrance); to fly apart, fly about, fly in all directions (esp. sparks); to vanish, disappear, be dispelled X to make fly, cause to fly (ھ s.th.); to knock (ھ s.th.) out of s.o.’s hand; to alarm or upset seriously ( ه s.o.), agitate, excite (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); = VI; pass. استطير ustuṭīra to be terrified │ عقله استطير (‘aqluhū) to go out of one’s mind (with astonishment or fright)
طير ṭair (coll. and n. un.) pl. طيور ṭuyūr, اطيار aṭyār birds, bird; augury, omen; طيور poultry; fowl │ جارحة طيور predatory birds, birds of prey; الطيور علم ‘ilm aṭ-ṭuyūr ornithology; الطير رؤوسھم على كأن (ka’anna, ṭaira) motionless or silent with awe
 طيرة ṭaira commotion, agitation (of anger, wrath); flight; female bird
طيرة ṭīra, ṭiyāra evil omen, portent, foreboding
طيار ṭayyār flying; evanescent, fleeting; volatile (liquid); floating, wafting, hovering; (pl. -ūn) flyer, aviator, pilot │ طيارة زيوت volatile oils; اول طيار (awwal) a military rank, approx.: first lieutenant of the Air Force (Eg. 1939); ثان طيار (ṭānin) approx.: second lieutenant of the Air Force (Eg. 1939)
طيارة ṭayyāra pl. -āt aviatrix, woman pilot; airplane, aircraft, kite (toy) │ طيارة رياضية (riyāḍīya) sport plane; قذافة طيارة (qaddāfa) bomber; مائية طيارة seaplane
aviation, flight; flying, ṭayarān طيران (bahlawānī) طيران بھلواني │ aeronautics glider (širā‘ī) طيران شراعي flying; stunt سالح airlines; خطوط الطيران gliding; flying, of minister وزير الطيران force; air الطيران aviation
مطار maṭār pl. -āt airfield, airport │ O
carrier aircraft مطار عائم
مطارة maṭāra airfield, airport مطير maṭīr airfield, airport تطير taṭayyur pessimism
طائر ṭā’ir flying; flyer, aviator, pilot; (pl. -āt, طير ṭair) bird; omen, presage │ الطائر سكون graveness, sedateness; الطائر على الميمون (maimūn) good luck │ Godspeed! (said to s.o. setting out on a journey); طار طائره (ṭā’iruhū) to become angry, blow one’s top
│ aircraft airplane, -āt pl. ṭā’ira طائرة the aboard ṭ-ṭ.) (maṭni على متن الطائرة traveling); (e.g., (air)plane by airplane;  طائرة O seaplane; (baḥrīya) طائرة بحرية (short-range) (daurīya) دورية plane; observation plane, reconnaissance glider; sailplane, (širā‘īya) طائرة شراعية pursuit fighter, al-muṭārada ṭ. طائرة المطاردة (‘amūdīya) طائرة عمودية interceptor; plane, combat bomber, light طائرة القتال helicopter; O do.; al-muqāṭala ṭ. طائرة المقاتلة plane; dive طائرة انقضاضية or طائرة االنقضاض طائرة نفاثة seaplane; طائرة مائية bomber; an-naql ṭ. طائرة النقل plane; jet (naffāṭa)
O and حامالت الطائرات O (plane); transport
carrier aircraft ناقالت الطائرات
متطير mutaṭayyir pessimist
مستطير mustaṭīr imminent, impending, threatening (of disaster); scattered, dispersed; spread out, spread all over, scattered about; widespread; pessimist
طيش) طاش) ṭāša i (ṭaiš, طيشان ṭayašān) to be inconstant, changeable, fickle, lightheaded, thoughtless, heedless, frivolous, reckless, undecided, confused, helpless, 579 aimless, desultory; to miss the mark (of an arrow, also الغرض عن); to stray (عن from the target), miss (عن a spot, e.g., said of the hand) │ سھمه طاش (sahmuhū) to be on the wrong track, bark up the wrong tree, be unsuccessful, fail; صوابه طاش (ṣawābuhū) to lose one’s head
طيش ṯaiš inconsistency, fickleness; recklessness, heedlessness, rashness; thoughtlessness; lightheadedness, levity, frivolity
طياشان ṭayašān inconstancy, fickleness; recklessness, heedlessness, rashness; thoughtlessness; lightheadedness, levity, frivolity
طياشة ṭiyāša inconstancy, fickleness; recklessness, heedlessness, rashness; thoughtless; lightheadedness, levity, frivolity
طائش ṭā’iš inconstant, changeable, fickle; lightheaded, frivolous; thoughtless, heedless, reckless; undecided, confused, perplexed, helpless; aimless, desultory, purposeless
طيف) طاف) ṭāfa i (ṭaif) to appear to s.o. (ب) in his sleep (of a specter)
طيف ṭaif pl. اطياف aṭyāf, طيوف ṭuyūf fantacy, phantasm; vision, apparition; phantom, specter, ghost; spectrum (phys.)
طيفي ṭaifī spectral, spectroscopic
مطياف miṭyāf spectroscope │ مطياف مصور (muṣawwir) spectrograph
طول see طيلة
طيلسان ṭailasān pl. طيالسة ṭayālisa a shawl-like garment worn over head and shoulders
طين II to daub or coat with clay (ھ s.th.)
 طين ṭīn pl. اطيان aṭyān clay, potter’s clay, argil; soil; basis, foundation │ الطين الخزفي (kazafī) kaolin, porcelain clay; زاد بلة الطين zāda ṭ-ṭīna ballatan to make things worse, aggravate or complicate the situation
طينة ṭīna clay, potter’s clay, argil; stuff, material, substance (of which s.th. is made); kind, specific character, disposition, constitution, nature
طيان ṭayyān mortar carrier, hod carrier

ظ
ظاء ẓā’ name of the letter ظ ظئر ẓi’r wet nurse
ظبي ẓaby pl. ظباء ẓibā’ gazelle (Gazella dorcas)
ظبية ẓabya pl. ẓabayāt female gazelle
ظر ẓirr sharp-edged stone, flint
ظرابي ẓarābīn , ظرابين pl. ẓirbān ẓaribān, ظربان
ẓarābīy polecat, fitchew
ظرف ẓarufa u (ẓarf, ظرافة ẓarāfa) to be charming, chic, nice, elegant, neat; to be witty, full of esprit II to adorn, embellish, polish (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), impart charm (ه ھ، to s.o., to s.th.); to put (ھ s.th.) into an envelope, cover or wrap, to envelop, wrap up, cover (ھ s.th.) V to affect charm or elegance, display affectedness; to show
o.s. elegant, witty, full of esprit VI = V; I to deem or find (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) elegant, charming, adroit, witty, etc.
ظرف ẓarf elegance, gracefulness, grace, charm; cleverness, resourcefulness; 580 wittiness, esprit; -- (pl. ظروف ẓurūf) vessel, receptacle, container; covering, wrap, cover; (letter) envelope; capsule, case; (gram.) adverb denoting place or time; pl. ظروف circumstances, conditions
│ بظرف or ظرف في within, in a (given) period of; مخففة ظروف (mukaffifa) and التخفيف ظروف extenuating circumstances; مشددة ظروف (mušaddida) aggravating circumstances; الظروف بحسب bi-ḥasabi aẓ- ẓ. according to circumstances, depending on the circumstances
ظرفي ẓarfī adverbial │ ظرفية بينة (bayyina) or ظرفي دليل dalīl circumstantial evidence
ظريف ẓarīf pl. ظرفاء ẓurafā’ , f. ظرائف ẓarā’if elegant, graceful, charming; full of esprit, witty, nice, fine
ظرافة ẓarāfa elegance, gracefulness, grace, charm; esprit, wittiness
تظريف taẓrīf wittiness, brilliant and witty manner
تظرف taẓarruf gracefulness, grace, elegance, charm, wittiness, esprit
maẓārīf  مظاريف pl. maẓrūf مظروف
envelope
متظرف mutaẓarrif elegant, dandy, fop
مستظرف mustaẓraf elegant │ اصناف مستظرفة luxury articles, fancy goods
ظعن ẓa‘ana a (ẓa‘n) to move away, leave, depart
ظعن ẓa‘n departure, start, journey, trek (esp. of a caravan)
ظعينة ẓa‘īna pl. ظعن ẓu‘un, اظعان aẓ‘ān camel-borne sedan chair for women; a woman in such a sedan
ظاعن ẓā‘in ephemeral, transient, transitory
ظفر ẓafira a (ẓafar) to be successful, succeed, be victorious, be triumphant; to gain a victory (على or ب over), conquer, vanquish, defeat, overcome, surmount, overwhelm (على or ب s.o., s.th.), get the better (على or ب of s.o., of s.th.); to seize ( على or ب s.o., s.th.), take posession (على or ب of s.o., of s.th.); to get, obtain, attain, achieve, gain, win (على or ب s.th.) II to grant victory (على or ه ب to s.o. over), make (ه s.o.) triumph, render (ه s.o.) victorious (على or ب over) IV = II; VI to ally, enter into an alliance or confederacy, join forces (على against)
ظفر ẓufur, ẓufr, ẓifr pl. اظفار aẓfār, اظافر aẓāfir , اظافير aẓāfīr  nail, fingernail; toenail; claw, talon │ اظفاره نعومة (منذ) من from (the days of) his earliest youth, since his earliest youth or adolescence; الظفر ناعم youthful, of tender age
ظفر ẓafar victory, triumph
 ظفر ẓafir victorious, successful, triumphant; (pl. ظفران) young man, youth (ḥij.)
اظفور uẓfūr pl. اظافير aẓāfīr  nail, fingernail, toenail; claw, talon
ظافر ẓāfir victorious, triumphant; successful; victor, conqueror
مظفر muẓaffar victorious, successful, triumphant
ظل ẓalla (1  pers. perf. ẓaliltu) a (ẓall. ظلول ẓulūl) to be; to become, turn into, grow into; (with foll. imperf., participle or على:) to continue to do s.th., go on doing s.th., persevere in doing s.th.,
stick to s.th., remain, persist in, e.g., ظل البيت يسكن (yaskunu l-baita) he continued to live in the house; صامتا ظل he remained silent, persisted in his silence; موقف على ظل (mauqif) to persist in a standpoint or attitude II to shade, overshadow (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), cast a shadow (ه ھ، over s.o., over s.th.); to screen, shelter, protect (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to preserve, guard, maintain, keep up 581
(ھ s.th.) IV = II; V to be shaded (ب by), sit in the shadow (ب of) X = V; to protect
o.s. from the sun (ب by or through s.th.), hide in the shadow (ب of s.th.), seek the shadow (ب of s.th.); to place s.o. under the protection or patronage of s.o. (ب), seek shelter or refuge with s.o. (ب), be under the patronage or protection of s.o. (ب)
ظل ẓill pl. ظالل ẓilāl, ظلول ẓulūl, اظالل aẓlāl shadow, shade, umbra; shelter, protection, patronage; shading, hub; slightest indication, semblance, trace, glimpse (of s.th.); tangent (geom.) │ ظل في (with foll. genit.) under the protection or patronage of, under the auspices of; under the sovereignty of; ظل تحت under the protection or patronage of, under the auspices of; الظل ثقيل insufferable, repugnant (of a person); الظل خفيف likable, nice (of a person); ظله استثقل (istatqala) to dislike s.o., find s.o. in sufferable, unbearable, a bore; ظله (قلص) تقلص taqallaṣa ẓilluhū his prestige or authority faded, diminished; it decreased, diminished, dwindled away, waned
ظلة ẓulla pl. ظلل ẓulal awning. marquee, canopy, sheltering hut or tent, shelter; shack, shanty; kiosk, stall; beach chair
ظليل ẓalīl shady, shaded, umbrageous
مظلة miẓalla, maẓalla pl. -āt, مظال umbrella, parasol, sunshade; lamp shade; awning; O veranda, porch │ المظلة عيد ‘īd al-m. Feast of Tabernacles, Sukkoth (Jud.); واقية مظلة (wāqiya) parachute; مظلة ھابطة do.; المظلة جندي jundī al-m. pl. جنود المظلة) المظالت) paratrooper
مظلى miẓallī pl. -ūn paratrooper; pl. paratroops, airborne troops
مظلل muẓallil shady, shadowy, umbrageous, shading, causing shadow
مظل muẓill shady, shadowy, umbrageous, shading, causing shadow
ظلع ẓala‘a a (ẓal‘) to limp, walk with a limp, walk lamely
ظلع ẓali‘ lame
hoof cloven اظالف ẓulūf, ظلوف pl. ẓilf ظلف
ظلم ẓalama i (ẓalm, ẓulm) to do wrong or evil; to wrong, treat unjustly, ill-treat, oppress, beset, harm, suppress, tyrannize (ه s.o.), commit outrage (ه upon s.o.); to act the tyrant, act tyrannically (ه toward or against s.o.); -- ẓalima a and IV to be or grow dark, dusky, gloomy, murky, tenebrous, darken, darkle V to complain (من of, about) VII and VIII اظلم iẓẓalama to suffer injustice, be wronged
ظلم ẓulm wrong; iniquity; injustice, inequity, unfairness; oppression, repression, suppression, tyranny; ظلما ẓulman unjustly, wrongfully
ظلمة ẓulma pl. -āt, ẓulumāt, ẓulamāt, ظلم ẓulam darkness, duskiness, gloom, murkiness │ الظلمات بحر baḥr aẓ-ẓ. the Atlantic Ocean
ظلماء ẓalmā’  darkness │ ظلماء ليلة (laila) pitch-dark night
ظالم ẓalām darkness, duskiness, gloom, murkiness
ظالم ẓalām evildoer, villain, malefactor, rogue, scoundrel, tyrant, oppressor
ظليم ẓalīm pl. ظلمان ẓilmān male ostrich
 ظالمة ẓulāma pl. -āt misdeed, wrong, iniquity, injustice, outrage
ظالمة aẓlam  darker, duskier, gloomier, murkier; a viler, more infamous, more heinous villain
مظلمة maẓlima pl. مظالم maẓālim  misdeed, wrong, iniquity. act of injustice, outrage
اظالم iẓlām darkness, gloom 582
ظالم ẓālim pl. -ūn, ظالم ẓullām, ظلمة ẓalama unjust, unfair, iniquitous, tyrannical, oppressing; tyrant, oppressor; offender, transgressor, sinner
مظلوم maẓlūm wronged, ill-treated, unjustly treated, tyrannized
مظلم muẓlim dark, dusky, gloomy, tenebrous, murky
ظمئ ẓami’a a (ظمأ ẓama’, ظماء ẓamā’, ظماءة ẓamā’a) to thirst, be thirsty II to make (ه s.o.) thirst
ظمء ẓim’, ظمأ and ظماء ẓamā’ thirst ظمآن ẓam’ān, f. ظمأى ẓam’ā thirsty ظامئ ẓāmi’ thirsty
ظن ẓanna (1  pers. perf. ẓanantu) u (ẓann) to think, believe, assume, presume, suppose ( ھ s.th.); to bold, think, deem, consider (ھ or ه ه s.o. to be s.o. or s.th.; ھ ھ s.th. to be s.th.); to suspect (ب or ه s.o.) │ يفعل ظنه to think s.o. capable of doing s.th., believe of
s.o. that he would do s.th.; ينكر احدا اظن ال (aḥadan yunkiru) I don’t think that anyone can deny; تخالفني اظنك ال (tukālifunī) I don’t believe that you can contradict me; فيه ظن على القدرة (qudrata) he considered him capable of ...; الظنون به ظن (ẓunūna) to think ill of s.o., have a low opinion of s.o.; الغباء به ظن (gabā’a) to suspect s.o. of stupidity IV to suspect (ه s.o.) V to surmise, form conjectures
ظن ẓann pl. ظنون ẓunūn opinion, idea, assumption, view, belief, supposition; doubt, uncertainty │ الظن حسن ḥusn aẓ-ẓ. good opinion; الظن سوء sū’ aẓ-ẓ. low opinion, distrust; الظن اغلب في or الظن اكثر في
most probably, most likely; ان الظن اكثر it is very likely that ...; ان منه ظنا (ẓannan) since he believed that ...; ب ظنك ما (ẓannuka) what is one to think of ...; حسن
ب ظنه (ḥasuna ẓannuhū) to have a good opinion of s.o., think well of s.o.; الظن احسن ب (aḥsana ẓ-ẓanna) do.; ظنا به ساء to have a low opinion of s.o., think ill of s.o.; اساء ب الظن (asā’a) do.
ظني ẓannī resting on mere assumption, presumptive, supposed, hypothetical
ظنة ẓinna pl. ظنن ẓinan suspicion, misgiving
ظنين ẓanīn suspicious, suspect(ed); unreliable, untrustworthy (على with regard to); a suspect
ظنون ẓanūn suspicious, distrustful
مظنة maẓinna pl. مظان maẓānn  time or place where one expects s.th.; (with foll. genit. or suffix) place where s.th. or s.o. is presumably to be found, its most likely location, the most likely place for it (or him) to be; suspicion, misgiving │ التمسته مظانه في I looked for him where I expected to find him, where he presumably was; في مظانه غير in places where he couldn’t possibly be
مظنون maẓnūn supposed, presumed, assumed; suspicious, suspect(ed)
ظنبوب ẓanbūb pl. ظنابيب ẓanābīb  shinbone
ظھر ẓahara a (ظھور ẓuhūr) to be or become visible, perceptible, distinct, manifest, clear, apparent, evident, obvious (ل to s.o.), come to light, appear, manifest itself, come into view, show, emerge, crop up; to appear, seem (ل to s.o.); to break out (disease); to come out; to appear, be published (book, periodical); to arise, result (من from); to ascend, climb, mount ( ھ s.th.); to gain the upperhand, to triumph (على over), get the better (على of), overcome, overwhelm, conquer, vanquish (على s.o.); to get (على s.th.) into one’s power; to gain or have knowledge (على of), come to know (على s.th.), become acquainted (على with); to know (على s.th.); to learn, 583 receive information (على about); to be cognizant (على of); to learn ( على s.th.) II to endorse (ھ a bill of exchange) III to help, assist, aid, support (ه s.o.) IV to make visible, make apparent, show, demonstrate, present, produce, bring to light, expose, disclose, divulge, reveal, manifest, announce, proclaim,
 make known, expound, set forth (ھ s.th.); to develop (ھ film; phot.); to grant victory (ه على to s.o. over), render victorious (ه على
s.o. over); to acquaint (ه على s.o. with s.th.), initiate (ه على s.o. into s.th.), give knowledge or information (ه على to s.o. about), inform, enlighten (ه على s.o. about), explain (ه على to s.o. s.th.); to let (ه s.o.) in on s.th. (على), make (ه s.o.) realize (على s.th.); to show, reveal (ه على to s.o. s.th.); to articulate fully VI to manifest, display, show outwardly, exhibit, parade ( ب s.th.); to feign, affect, pretend, simulate, (ب s.th.), act as if, make out as if (ب); to demonstrate, make a public demonstration; to help one another, make common cause (على against) X to show, demonstrate, expose (ھ s.th.); to memorize, learn by heart (ھ s.th.); to know by heart (ھ s.th.); to seek help, assistance, or support (ب with), appeal for help, for assistance (ب to س.o.); to overcome, surmount, conquer, vanquish ( على s.o., s.th.), have or gain the upperhand (على over), get the better (على of)
حديد and ظھر الحديد │ iron cast ẓahr ظھر زھر see الظھر
ظھر ẓahr pl. ظھور ẓuhūr, اظھر aẓhur back; rear, rear part, rear aide, reverse; flyleaf; deck (of a steamer); upper part, top, surface; ظھورات ẓuhūrāt (as a genit.; eg.) pro tempore, provisional, temporary
│ الظھر سلسلة silsilat aẓ-ẓ. spine, vertebral column; لبطن ظھرا ẓahran li-baṭnin upside down, topsy-turvy; عقب على ظھرا (‘aqib) from the ground up, radically, entirely, completely; الغيب بظھر bi-ẓ. il-gaib behind s.o.’s back, insidiously, treacherously; secretly, stealthily, clandestinely; بين اظھرھم in their midst, among them; بين من اظھرنا from our midst, from among us; على ظھر on (e.g., on the ground, on the water. etc.), الباخرة ظھر على on board the steamer; القلب ظھر عن (ẓ. al-qalb), قلب ظھر عن (ẓ. qalbin) or الغيب ظھر عن (ẓ. il-gaib) by heart; ظھورات مستخدم (mustakdam) temporary employee
ظھر ẓuhr pl. اظھار aẓhār noon, midday; (f.) midday prayer (Isl. Law) │ الظھر بعد in the afternoon, p.m.; الظھر قبل in the forenoon, a.m.
ظھري ẓihrī: ظھريا (طرحه) نبذه to pay no attention to s.th., not to care about s.th. disregard s.th.
ظھير ẓahīr helper, assistant, aid, supporter; partisan, backer; back (in soccer); (mor.) decree, edict, ordinance
ظھور ẓuḥūr appearance; visibility, conspicuousness; pomp, splendor, show, ostentation, window-dressing │ الظھور حب ḥubb aẓ-ẓ. ostentatiousness, love of pomp; الظھور عيد ‘īd aẓ-ẓ. Epiphany (Chr.)
الظھران aẓ-ẓahrān Dhahran (town in extensive oil region of E Saudi Arabia)
ظھرانيھم بين baina ẓahrānaihim in their midst, among them
ظھارة ẓahāra outside, right side (of a garment); blanket (e.g., of a mule)
ظھيرة ẓahīra noon, midday, midday heat
اظھر aẓhar  more distinct, more manifest, clearer
مظھر maẓhar pl. مظاھر maẓāhir  (external) appearance, external make-up, guise; outward bearing, comportment, conduct, behavior; exterior, look(s), sight, view; semblance, aspect; bearer or object of a phenomenon, object in which s.th.
584 manifests itself; phenomenon; symptom (med.); pl. manifestations, expressions │ الحياة مظاھر m. al-ḥayāh manifestations of life (biol.); المظھر في externally, in outward appearance, outwardly
تظھير taẓhīr endorsement, transfer by endorsement (of a bill of exchange; com.)
ظھار ẓihār pre-Islamic form of divorce, consisting in the words of repudiation: you are to me like my mother’s back (انت امي كظھر علي anti 'alayya ka-ẓahri ummī)
مظاھرة muẓāhara assistance, support, backing; (pl. -āt) (public) demonstration, rally
اظھار iẓhār presentation, exposition, demonstration, exhibition, disclosure, exposure, revelation, announcement, declaration, manifestation, display; developing (phot.)
 تظاھر taẓāhur dissimulation, feigning, pretending, pretension; hypocrisy, dissemblance; (pl. -āt) (public) demonstration, rally
ظاھر ẓāhir (of God) mastering, knowing (على s.th.); visible, perceptible, distinct, manifest, obvious, conspicuous, clear, patent, evident, apparent; external, exterior, outward; seeming, presumed, ostensible, alleged; outside, exterior, surface; outskirts, periphery (of a city); (gram.) substantive; (pl. ظواھر ẓawāhir ) external sense, literal meaning (specif., of Koran and Prophetic Tradition); ظاھرا ẓāhiran externally, outwardly; seemingly, presumedly, ostensibly, allegedly │ ظاھر اللفظ ẓ. al-lafẓ the literal meaning of an expression; ان الظاھر it seems, it appears that ...; الظاھر حسب ḥasaba ẓ-ẓ. in outward appearance, externally, outwardly; في الظاھر apparently, obviously, evidently; في الظاھر and األمر ظاھر في (ẓ. il-amr) seen outwardly, externally; outwardly; الظاھر من from outside
ظاھري ẓāhirī outer, outside, external, exterior, outward; superficial; Zahiritic, interpreting the Koran according to its literal meaning
ظاھرة ẓāhira pl. ظواھر ẓawāhir  phenomenon, outward sign or token, external symptom or indication │ ظواھر الحياة ẓ. al-ḥayāh biological phenomena (biol.); الجوية الظواھر علم ‘ilm aẓ-ẓ. al- gawwīya meteorology; الظواھر ستر (ẓawāhira) to keep up appearances
متظاھر mutaẓāhir pl. -ūn demonstrator
ظاء ẓā’ name of the letter ظ



ع
عب ‘abba u (‘abb) to drink in large draughts, gulp down (ھ s.th.); to pour down, toss down (ه a drink); to lap up, drink avidly (ھ s.th.)
عب ‘ubb, ‘ibb breast pocket
عباب ‘ubāb f. torrents, floods; waves, billows
يعبوب ya‘būb torrential river
عبأ ‘aba’a a with negation; ب عبأ ما not to care about, not to give a hoot for, pay no attention to, attach no importance to, not to insist on │ به يعبأ ال (yu‘ba’u) unimportant, insignificant; عابئ غير indifferent, unconcerned II to prepare, arrange (ھ s.th.); to array, set up (ھ s.th.); to mobilize, call up (جيشا jaišan an army); to fill, pack (ھ ب s.th. with); 585 to load, charge (ھ ب s.th. with); to draw off, decant (ھ في s.th. into), bottle (ھ s.th.)
عبء ‘ib’ pl. اعباء a‘bā’ load, burden ( على on), encumbrance (على to) │ عبء اإلثبات ‘i. al-itbāt burden of proof (jur.); نھض or كلھا األعباء قام to take all burdens upon o.s., carry all burdens
عباء ‘abā’ pl. اعبئة a‘bi’a aba, cloak- like, woolen wrap (occasionally striped)
عباءة ‘abā’a pl. -āt aba, a cloak-like, woolen wrap (occasionally striped)
تعبئة ta‘bi’a mobilization; drafting, conscription; filling, drawing off, bottling
عابئ ‘ābi’ see under verb I
عبث ‘abita a (‘abat) to fool around, indulge in horseplay, commit a folly; to play, joke, jest (ب with); to toy, play a frivolous game (ب with), mock (ب s.o., s.th.); to play (absent-mindedly), fidget, fuas, dawdle, fiddle (ب with s.th., e.g., while talking); to handle, manipulate (ب s.th.), tinker (ب with); to abuse (ب s.th.); to commit an offense (ب against), violate (ب s.th.), infringe, encroach (ب upon); to impair, injure (ب s.th.) III to amuse o.s., make fun, play around, banter, dally (ه with s.o.), tease (ه s.o.), play a trick, prank or joke (ه on s.o.)
عبث ‘abat (frivolous) play; pastime, amusement; joke, jest; mockery; عبثا ‘abatan in vain, futilely, to no avail,
Uselessly, fruitlessly │ ان العبث من it is foolish and useless to ...; ان استطاع عبثا ولكن يجيبه (iataṭā‘a, yujībahū) but he couldn’t give him an answer
عبث mu‘ābata pl.-āt teasing, joke or prank played on s.o.; funmaking, jesting, banter, raillery
 عابث ‘ābit joking, jocular; mocking, scornful; frivolous; wanton, wicked, outrageous; offender, transgressor, evildoer, sinner
 عبد ‘abada u (عبادة ‘ibada, عبودة ‘ubūda, عبودية ‘ubādīya) to serve, worship (ه a god), adore, venerate (ه s.o., a god or human being), idolize, deify (ه s.o.) II to enslave, enthrall, subjugate, subject (ه s.o.); to improve, develop, make serviceable, make passable for traffic (ھ a road) V to devote
o.s. to the service of God X to enslave, enthrall, subjugate (ه s.o.)
عبد ‘abd pl. عبيد ‘abād, عبدان ‘ubdān, ‘ibdān slave, serf; bondsman, servant; -- (pl. عباد ‘ibad) servant (of God), human being, man; العباد humanity, mankind │
العبد الضعيف modesty); of (form I =  العبد <I
do.
a (eg.) ‘abdallāwī عبد الالوي، عبدالوي melon of variety
عبدة ‘abda pl. -āt woman slave, slave girl, bondwoman
عبادة الشمس and عباد الشمس ‘abbād: عباد annuus (Helianthus sunflower aš-šams ‘a. L.)
عبادة ‘ibāda worship, adoration, veneration; devotional service, divine service (Chr.); pl. -āt acts of devotion, religious observances (Isl. Law)
عبودة ‘ubūda humble veneration, homage, adoration, worship; slavery, serf- dom; servitude, bondage
عبودية ‘ubūdīya humble veneration, homage, adoration, worship; slavery, serfdom; servitude, bondage
معبد ma‘bad pl. معابد ma‘ābid  place of worship; house of God, temple
تعبيد ta‘bīd enslavement, enthrallment, subjugation, subjection; paving, pavement
│ الطرق تعبيد t. aṭ-ṭuruq road construction 586
تعبد ta‘abbud piety, devoutness, devotion, worship; hagiolatry, worship or cult of saints (Chr.)
استعباد isti‘bād enslavement, enthrallment, subjugation
‘abada عبدة ‘ibād, عباد -ūn, pl. ‘ābid عابد
worshiper, adorer,
معبود ma‘būd worshiped, adored; deity, godhead; idol
معبودة ma‘būda ladylove, adored woman
معبد ma‘bad passable, smooth, improved (road)
متعبد muta‘abbid pious, devout; pious worshiper (Chr.)
عبدان ‘abadān  Abadan (island and town in W Iran, oil center)
عبر ‘abara u (‘abr, عبور ‘ubūr) to cross, traverse (ھ s.th.); to ford (ھ s.th.), wade ( ھ through s.th.); to swim (ھ s.th. or across s.th.); to pass (ھ over s.th.); to ferry (ھ a river, and the like); ھ به عبر to carry s.o. across or over s.th.; to pass, elapse (time), fade, dwindle; to pass away, die, depart; -- ‘abira (‘abar) to shed tears II to interpret ( ھ a dream); to state clearly, declare, assert, utter, express, voice (عن s.th.), give expression (عن to a feeling); to designate ( ب عن s.th. with or by); to determine the weight of a coin (ھ), weigh (ھ a coin) VIII to be taught a lesson, be warned; to learn a lesson, take warning, to learn, take an example (ب from); to consider, weigh, take into account or consideration (ھ s.th.), allow, make allowances (ھ for s.th.); to acknowledge a quality (ھ) in s.o. (ل); to deem, regard, take (ه ھ، ھ s.o. s.th. as), look (ه ھ، ھ at s.th. as); to esteem, honor, revere, value, respect, hold in esteem (ه s.o.), have regard (ه for s.o.) │ to shed tears, weep
عبر ‘abr crossing, traversing, transit; passage; fording; ‘abra (prep.) across, over; beyond, on the other side of
عبور ‘ubūr crossing, traversing, transit; passage; fording
عبير ‘abīr fragrance, scent, perfume, aroma; bouquet (of wine)
عبري ‘ibrī Hebrew, Hebraic; (pl. -ūn) a Hebrew; العبري or العبرية Hebrew, the Hebrew language
عبرة’abra pl. ’abarāt, عبر ‘ibar tear
 عبرة ‘ibra pl. عبر ‘ibar admonition, monition, warning; (warning or deterring) example, lesson, advice, rule, precept (to be followed); consideration befitting s.th.; that which has to be considered, be taken into consideration or account, that which is of consequence, of importance, s.th. decisive or consequential │ العبرة موطن mauṭin al-‘i. the salient point, the crucial point; به عبرة ال (‘ibrata) it deserves no attention, it is of no consequence; في or
ب العبرة the crucial factor(s) is (are) ..., decisive is (are) ...; لمن عبرة ال (li-man) it is of no consequence if s.o. …
عبارة ‘ibāra pl. -āt explanation, interpretation; mode of expression, diction; word; sentence, clause, phrase, idiom, expression │ اخرى بعبارة (ukrā) in other words, expressed otherwise; عبارة فعبارة ‘ibāratan fa-‘ibāratan sentence by sentence, word by word; عن عبارة consisting in; tantamount to, equivalent to, meaning ...
عبراني ‘ibrānī Hebrew, Hebraic; a Hebrew; العبراني or العبرانية Hebrew, the Hebrew language
معبر ma‘bar pl. معابر ma‘ābir  crossing point, crossing, traverse, passage(way); ford; pass, pass road, defile; O lobby
معبر mi‘bar pl. معابر ma‘ābir  medium for crossing, ferry, ferryboat; bridge 587
تعبير ta‘bīr interpretation (of a dream); assertion, declaration, expression, utterance (عن of a feeling); (pl. -āt) expression (in general, also artistic); (pl. – تعابير ta‘ābīr ) (linguistic) expression, phrase, term │ آخر بتعبير (ākar) in other words, expressed otherwise
تعبيري ta‘bīrī expressional, expressive, emotive
اعتبار i‘tibār respect, regard, deference, esteem; (pl. -āt) consideration, regard; reflection, contemplation; approach, outlook, point of view, view │ ب) ل اعتبارا) (itibāran) with respect to, with regard to, in consideration of, considering	in
view of (s.th.); من اعتبارا from, as of, beginning ..., starting with	, effective
from	(with foll. indication of time);
الشيء باعتبار with respect to, with regard to,
in consideration of, considering in view of (s.th.); ان باعتبار bi-‘tibāri an considering (the fact) that ..., with regard to the fact that ..., in view of the fact that ...; provided that ..., with the proviso that ...; باعتباره as, in terms of, in the opacity of, e.g., وزير الوزراء اقدم باعتباره الخارجية (aqdama l- wuzarā’i) the Foreign Minister in his capacity of senior-ranking minister; بھذا االعتبار from this standpoint, from this viewpoint; ان اعتبار على considering (the fact) that ..., with regard to the fact that ..., in view of the fact that ...; on the assumption that ...; االعتبار ھذا على from this standpoint, from this viewpoint; كل في اعتبار in every respect; حقيقة او اعتبارا (ḥaqīqatan) from a subjective point of view or in reality
اعتباري i‘tibārī based on a subjective approach or outlook; relative │ شخصية اعتبارية (šakṣīya) legal person (jur.)
عابر ‘ābir passing; crossing, traversing, etc. (see I); fleeting (smile); transient, transitory, ephemeral; bygone, past, elapsed (time); (pl. -ūn) passerby │ O القارات عابر صاروخ intercontinental ballistic missile, ICBM
معبر mu‘abbir interpreter (عن of feelings); expressive, significant │ رقص معبر (raqṣ) interpretative dancing
gun musket, )على (ḥi عبرود □
عبس ‘abasa i (‘abs, عبوس ‘ubs) to frown, knit one’s brows; to glower, lower, scowl, look sternly │ وجھه في عبس to give s.o. an angry look, scowl at s.o. II = I
عبوس ‘abūs frowning, scowling; gloomy, dismal, melancholy; stern, austere; ominous
عبوس ‘ubūs gloominess, gloom, dreariness; sternness, austerity, severity, gravity
عبوسة ‘ubūsa frown, scowl; glower, gloomy look, a gloomy, morose, sullen or stern mien
عباسي ‘abbāsī Abbaside; (pl. -ūn) an Abbaside
عابس ‘ābis frowning, scowling; gloomy, morose, sullen; austere, stern, severe
 عبيط ‘abīṭ pl. عبطاء ‘ubaṭā’  stupid, imbecile, idiotic, silly, foolish
اعتباطا i‘tibāṭan at random, haphazardly, arbitrarily
عبق ‘abiqa a (‘abaq) to cling (ب to), linger (ب on, of ascent); to be fragrant, exhale fragrance; to be filled, be redolent (ب with a scent, etc.)
عبق ‘abiq fragrant, redolent, exhaling fragrance
عبقة ‘abqa pressure (on the chest), feeling of suffocation
عابق ‘ābiq fragrant, redolent, exhaling fragrance 588
عبقر ‘abqar legendary place inhabited by jinn; fairyland, wonderland
عبقري ‘abqarī multicolored, colorful carpet; ingenious, genial; (pl. -ūn, عباقرة ‘abāqira) ingenious person, genius
عبقرية ‘abqarīya ingenuity, genius
عبك ‘abak camlet (woolen fabric)
عبل 'abl pl. عبال ‘ibāl plump, well rounded, chubby, fat (e.g., arms)
عبال ‘abāl (coll.; n. un. ة) a variety of wild rose, eglantine
اعبل a‘bal granite
عبو II = عبأ II; to fill, pack (ھ ب s.th. with); to load, charge (ھ ب s.th. with)
عبوة ‘ubūwa pl. -āt package, pack (of an article, of a commodity); container with its contents
q.v. ‘abā’a عباءة = ‘abāya عباية
عتب ‘ataba i u (‘atb, معتب ma‘tab) to blame, censure, reprove, scold (على s.o.); -- عتب بابه ‘ataba bābahū to cross the threshold of
s.o. II to hesitate, be slow, be tardy III to blame, censure, reprove, scold (ه على s.o. for)
عتب ‘atb censure, blame, rebuke, reproof, reprimand
عتبة ‘ataba pl. عتب ‘atab, اعتاب a‘tāb doorstep, threshold; (door) lintel, also العتبة العليا (‘ulyā); step, stair │ السنية األعتاب (sanīya) (formerly:) His Highness the Bey (Tun.); الملك ألعتاب رفعه rafa‘ahū li-a. l-
malik to present s.th. (e.g., a gift) most obediently to the king
عتاب ‘itāb censure, blame, rebuke, reproof, reprimand
معاتبة mu‘ātaba censure, blame, rebuke, reproof, reprimand
عتد ‘atuda u (عتاد ‘atād) to be ready, be prepared IV to prepare, ready, make ready (ھ s.th.)
عتاد ‘atād pl. اعتد a’tud, اعتدة a‘tida equipment; (war) material, matériel, ammunition │ حربي عتاد (ḥarbī) war material, materiel, ammunition
عتيد ‘atīd ready, prepared; future, forthcoming; venerable; solemn
□ معتر mu‘attar (< معثر) slovenly, floppy; stupid; unfortunate
عتق ‘atuqa u (عتاقة ‘atāqa) and ‘ataqa i (‘atq, ‘itq) to grow old, age; to mature, mellow (wine); -- ‘ataqa i to be emancipated, be free (slave) IV to free, set free, release, emancipate, manumit (ه s.o., esp. a slave) VII to free o.s., rid o.s. (من of)
عتق ‘itq age, vintage (esp. of wine); liberty (as opposed to slavery); emancipation, freeing, manumission (of a slave)
عتيق ‘atīq old, ancient, antique; matured, mellowed, aged (wine); of ancient tradition, long-standing; antiquated, outmoded, obsolete; free, emancipated (slave); noble │ الطراز عتيق old-fashioned
عتاقة ‘atāqa age, vintage (esp. of wine)
اعتاق i‘tāq freeing, liberation, manumission (of a slave)
عاتق ‘ātiq pl. عواتق ‘awātiq  shoulder │ عاتقه على اخذه (akadahū) to take s.th. upon o.s., take over, assume s.th; المسؤولية القى عاتقه على (alqā l-mas’ūliyata) to place the responsibility on s.o.; فالن عاتق على وقع to be at s.o.’s expense, fall to s.o.
معتق mu‘attaq mellowed, matured (wine); old, ancient
معتق mu‘tiq emancipator, liberator, manumitter (of slaves)
عتك ‘ataka i to attack
 عاتك ‘atik clear, pure, limpid (esp. wine) 589
عتل ‘atala u i (‘atl) to carry (ھ s.th.)
عتال ‘attāl porter, carrier
عتلة ‘atala pl. عتل ‘atal crowbar
عتالة ‘itāla porter’s or carrier’s trade; porterage
عتم ‘atama i (‘atm) to hesitate II to darken, obscure, cloud, black out (ھ s.th.); to hesitate (esp. with neg.) │ عتم ما ان، يعتم ال ان يعتم لم ان، it does not (did not) take long until …, before long ..., presently IV to hesitate, waver
عتم (coll.; n. un. ة) wild olive tree عتمة ‘atma dark, gloom, darkness عتمة ‘atama first third of the night
عتامة ‘atāma opacity, opaqueness; (pl.
-āt) darkness
تعتيم ta‘tīm darkening, obscuring, clouding
معتم mu‘tim dark
عته pass. ‘utiha (‘uth, ‘atah, عتاھة ‘atāha) to be or become· idiotic, imbecile, dimwitted, feeble-minded, demented, insane, mad, crazy
عته ‘uth, ‘atah idiocy, imbecility dimwittedness, feeble-mindedness
عتاھة ‘atāha idiocy, imbecility, dimwittedness, feeble-mindedness
معتوه ma‘tūh pl. معاتيه ma‘ātīh  idiotic, insane, mad, crazy; idiot, lunatic, imbecile, demented person, insane person
(عتو and عتا (عتي ‘atā u (عتو ‘utūw, عتي ‘utīy, ‘itīy) to be insolent, refractory, recalcitrant, unruly; to be violent, fierce, strong, wild, furious, raging (e.g., storms) V do.
عتو ‘utūw presumption, haughtiness, insolence, impertinence, arrogance; recalcitrance, unruliness, wildness, ferocity
عتي ‘utīy presumption, haughtiness insolence, impertinence, arrogUC8; recalcitrance, unruliness, wildness,
ferocity │ عتيا العمر من بلغ (‘umr) to attain great age; to be far advanced in years
عتي ‘atīy pl. اعتاء a‘tā’ haughty, impertinent, insolent; recalcitrant, refractory, unruly, intractable, wild
عات ‘ātin pl. عتاة ‘utāh presumptuous, impudent, impertinent, insolent, arrogant; violent, fierce, strong, wild, furious, raging (storm)
عث ‘utt (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. عثث ‘utat moth worm, moth larva; moth
معثوث ma‘tūt moth-ridden, fall of moths, moth-eaten
عثر ‘atara u i (‘atr, عثير ‘atīr, عثار ‘itār) to stumble, trip; به عثر to trip s.o., make s.o. stumble, make s.o. fall, fell s.o., topple s.o.; -- ‘atara u (عثور ‘utūr) to come (ب or على scroll), hit, light, strike, stumble (ب or على upon), find, discover, detect (ب or على
s.o. s.th.) II to cause (ه s.o.) to stumble, trip (ه s.o.), make (ه s.o.) fall, topple (ه s.o.) IV = II; to acquaint (ه على s.o. with s.th.); to lead (ه على s.o. to s.th.) V to stumble, trip; to stutter, stammer, speak brokenly │ الخيبة بأذيال تعثر (bi-adyāl l- kaiba) to fail, meet with failure
عثرة ‘atra pl. ‘atarāt stumbling, tripping; false step, slip, fall │ عثرة حجر ḥajar ‘a. stumbling block; سبيله في عثرة وقف (‘atratan) to be a stumbling block for s.o., obstruct s.o.’s way
عثور ‘atūr discovery, detection (على of)
عثير ‘ityar dust, fine sand
عاثور ‘ātūr pl. عواثير ‘awātīr  pitfall; difficulty
متعثر muta‘attir stumbling, tripping; speaking (a foreign language) brokenly; broken (of a foreign language)
عثماني ‘utmānī Ottoman; (adj. and n.) 590
beard ‘atānīn  عثانين pl. ‘utnūn عثنون
عثو) and عثا (عثي ‘atā u (عثو ‘utūw), عثى ‘atā a i (‘utīy, ‘itīy) to act wickedly, do harm, cause mischief
عج ‘ajja i (‘ajj, عجيج ‘ajīj) to cry, yell, roar; to cry out for help (الى to); to rage, roar; to thunder, resound (ب with); to swarm, teem
 (ب with) II to raise, swirl up (الغبار al- gubāra the dust; of the wind)
عج ‘ajj crying, yelling; clamor, roar
عجة ‘ujja omelet
عجيج ‘ajīj crying, yelling; clamor, roar عجاج ‘ajāj (swirling) dust; smoke عجاجة ‘ajāja pl. -āt cloud of dust;
billow of smoke
عجاج ‘ajjāj crying, yelling, clamoring, roaring, boisterous, vociferous; raging (esp. sea)
عجب ‘ajiba a (‘ajab) to wonder, marvel, be astonished, be amazed (ب or ل at, over) II to strike with wonder or astonishment, amaze, astonish, surprise (ه s.o.) IV = II; to please, delight (ه s.o.), appeal (ه to s.o.); -- pass. IV u‘jiba to admire (ب s.o., s.th.), have a high opinion (ب of); to be proud (ب of), be vain (ب about), glory (ب in) │ بنفسه اعجب (u‘jiba) to be conceited, be vain V to wonder, marvel, be astonished, be amazed (من at, over) X = V
عجب ‘ujb pride (ب of, in), vanity (ب in), conceit
عجب ‘ajab astonishment, amazement; (pl. اعجاب a‘jāb) wonder, marvel; عجبا ‘ajaban how strange! how odd! How astonishing! how remarkable! للعجب يا yā la-l-‘ajab oh, how wonderful! عجب ال (‘ajaba) no wonder! عجب امر amrun ‘ajabun a wonderful, marvelous thing; عجاب عجب (ujāb) most prodigious happening, wonder of wonders
عجاب ‘ujāb wonderful, wondrous, marvelous, astonishing, amazing; see ‘ajab
عجيب ‘ajīb wonderful, wondrous, marvelous, admirable; astonishing, amazing, remarkable, strange, odd
عجيبة ‘ajība pl. عجائب ‘ajā’ib wondrous thing, unheard of thing, prodigy, marvel, miracle, wonder; pl. remarkable things,
curiosities, oddities │ ان األمر عجائب من the remarkable thing about the matter is that ...
اعجب a’jab  more wonderful, more marvelous; more astonishing, more remarkable
اعجوبة u‘jūba pl. اعاجيب a‘ājīb  wondrous thing; unheard-of thing, prodigy, marvel, miracle, wonder
تعجيب ta‘jīb arousing of admiration (من for s.th.), boosting (من of s.th.), publicity ( من for s.th.)
اعجاب i‘jāb admiration (ب for); pleasure, satisfaction, delight (ب in); acclaim; pride; self-complacency, conceit
تعجب ta‘ajjub astonishment, amazement
استعجاب isti‘jāb astonishment, amazement
معجب mu‘jib causing admiration, admirable
معجب mu‘jab admirer (ب of s.o., of s.th.); proud (ب of), vain (ب about) │ بنفسه معجب (bi-nafsihī) conceited, vain
متعجب muta‘ajjib amazed, astonished
عجر ‘ajar outgrowth, protuberance, excrescence, projection
عجر ‘ajr (eg.) green, unripe
عجرة ‘ujra pl. عجر ‘ujar knot, knob, hump, protuberance, excrescence │ عجره وبجره ‘ujaruhū wa-bujaruhū his (its) obvious 591 and hidden shortcomings, all his (its) faults
عجور ‘aggūr (coll.; n. un. ة) a variety of green melon, (eg.)
عجرف II ta‘ajrafa to be presumptuous, arrogant, haughty
عجرفة ‘ajrafa presumption, arrogance, haughtiness
عجز ‘ajaza i (‘ajz) and ‘ajiza a to be weak, lock strength, be incapable (عن of), be unable (عن to do s.th.); -- ‘ajaza u ( عجوز ‘ujūz) and ‘ajuza u to age, grow old (woman) │ ان عجز ما (‘ajaza, ‘ajiza) not to fail to ... II to weaken, debilitate, disable, incapacitate, hamstring, cripple, paralyze ( ه s.o.) IV to weaken, debilitate, disable, incapacitate, hamstring, cripple, paralyze (. s.o.); to be impossible (ه for s.o.); to speak in an inimitable, or wonderful, manner │ والمشي الدب عن اعجزه (dabb,
 mašy) to paralyze s.o.’s every move; اعجزه الفھم عن (fahm) to make comprehension impossible for s.o. X to deem (ه s.o.) incapable (عن of)
عجز ‘ajz weakness, incapacity, disability, failure, impotence (عن for, to do s.th.); deficit
عجز 'ajuz, ‘ajz pl. اعجاز a‘jāz backside, rump, posteriors │ النخل اعجاز a. an-nakl stumps of palm trees; على العجز رد الصدرعجز (ṣadr) to bring the rear to the fore, i.e., to reverse conditions, make up for a deficiency
عجوز ‘ujūz old age
عجوز ‘ajūz pl. عجائز ‘ajā’iz , عجز ‘ujuz old woman; old man; old, advanced in years
عجيزة ‘ajīza posteriors, buttocks (of a woman)
اعجز i‘jāz inimitability, wondrous nature (of the Koran)
عاجز ‘ājiz pl. عواجز ‘awājiz  weak, feeble, powerless, impotent; incapable (عن of), unable (عن to do s.th.); -- (pl. عجزة ‘ajaza) physically weak; physically disabled; decrepit │ العجزة اسعاف is‘āf
al-‘a. care for the aged
معجز mu‘jiz miracle (esp. one performed by a prophet)
معجزة mu‘jiza pl. -āt miracle (esp. one performed by a prophet)
عجعج ‘aj‘aja to bellow, bawl, roar
عجعجة ‘aj‘aja clamor, roar, bellowing
‘ijāf عجاف pl. ‘ajfā’  عجفاء f.  , a‘jaf اعجف
slender, slim, svelte; lean, emaciated
عجل ‘ajila a (‘ajal, عجلة ‘ajala) to hurry, hasten, speed, rush, be in a hurry; to rush, hasten, hurry, come quickly (الى to) II to hurry, hasten, speed, rush, be in a hurry; to bring about quickly, hasten on (ب s.th.), bring or take quickly (ب ل s.th. to); to hurry, rush, urge, impel, drive (ه s.o.), expedite, speed up, accelerate (ه s.th.); to pay in advance; to pay spot cash (ل ھ to
s.o. for) III to hurry in order to catch up (ھ ه , with s.o., with s.th.), rush, hurry (ه ,ھ after s.o., after s.th.); to catch up (ه with s.o.), overtake (ه s.o.; esp. death), descend
swiftly (ه ,ھ upon); to anticipate, forestall (ه ب s.o. in or with) IV to hurry, rush, urge, impel, drive (ه s.o.) │ عن الوقت اعجله (waqtu) the time was too short for him
to ... V to hurry, hasten, speed, rush, be in a hurry; to seek to get ahead in a hurry; to hurry, rush, urge (ه الى s.o. to); to anticipate, forestall (ه ,ھ s.o., s.th.); to be ahead (ھ of s.th.), precede (ھ e.g., events); to receive at once, without delay (ھ a sum), receive spot cash │ الجواب تعجله (jawāba) to demand a quick reply from
s.o. X to hurry, hasten, rush, speed, be in a hurry; to wish to expedite (ھ s.th.); to 592 hurry, rush, urge, impel, drive (ه s.o.), expedite, speed up, accelerate (ھ s.th.)
عجل ‘ijl pl. عجول ‘ujūl, عجلة ‘ijala calf │ البحر عجل ‘i. al-baḥr sea calf, seal
عجل ‘ajal hurry, haste │ عجل على in a hurry, hurriedly, speedily, quickly, fast, rapidly
عجل ‘ajil quick, fast, swift, speedy, rapid
عجلة ‘ajala hurry, haste; precipitance, precipitation
عجلة ‘ajala pl. -āt wheel; bicycle │ O سيارة عجلة (sayyāra) motorcycle; القيادة عجلة steering wheel; O نارية عجلة (nārīya) motorcycle
عجيل ‘ajīl pl. عجال ‘ijāl quick, fast, swift, speedy, rapid
عجول ‘ajūl pl. عجل ‘ujul quick, fast, swift, speedy, rapid; hasty, precipitate, rash
عجالة ‘ujāla work quickly thrown together, hastily prepared work, rush job;
O sketch (lit.); quickly compiled report
عجالن ‘ajlān , f. عجلى ‘ajlā, pl. عجالى ‘ajālā, عجال ‘ijāl quick, fast, swift, speedy, hurried, rapid, hasty, cursory
‘ujl عجل pl. ‘ujlā, عجلى f. a‘jal , اعجل
quicker, faster; hastier; more cursory
تعجيل ta‘jīl speeding-up, expediting, acceleration
استعجال isti‘jāl hurry, haste; precipitance, precipitation │ وجه على االستعجال (wajhi l-ist.) expeditiously, speedily
 استعجالي isti‘jālī speedy, expeditious; temporary, provisional
عاجل ‘ājil pertaining to this world, worldly; temporal; immediate; عاجال ‘ājilan soon, presently, before long; at once, immediately, instantly │ عاجل حكم (ḥukm) summary judgment (jur.); او عاجال آجال sooner or later; واآلجل العاجل في now and in the future; آجله او عاجله في sooner or later; العاجل القريب في in the immediate future
عاجلة ‘ājila fast train, express train;
العاجلة life in this world, temporal existence
معجل mu‘ajjal urgent, pressing; premature │ الرسم معجل m. ar-rasm prepaid, postpaid (mail item); بالنفاذ حكم المعجل (ḥukm, nafād) summary judgment, sentence by summary proceedings (jur.)
معجل دفع dafa‘a mu‘ajjalan to pay in advance
متعجل muta‘ajjil hasty, rash, precipitate مستعجل musta‘jil hurried, in a hurry مستعجل musta‘jal expeditious, speedy;
urgent, pressing; precipitate, premature │ المستعجلة األمور قاضي magistrate of summary justice
عجم ‘ajama u (‘ajm) to try, test, put to the test ( ه s.o.) │ عوده عجم (‘ūdahū) to try, test s.o., put s.o. to the test IV to provide (ھ a letter) with a diacritical point (with diacritical points) VII to be obscure, incomprehensible, unintelligible (على to s.o.; language) X to become un-Arabic
عجم ‘ajam (coll.) barbarians, non-
Persia بالد العجم or العجم Persians; Arabs;
عجم ‘ajam (coll.; n. un. ة) stone, kernel, pit, pip, seed (of fruit)
عجمي ‘ajamī pl. اعجام a‘jām barbarian, non-Arab; Persian (adj. and n.)
عجمة ‘ajma barbarism, incorrectness (in speaking Arabic)
‘ajmawāt عجموات pl. ‘ajmā’  عجماء
(dumb) beast
اعجم a‘jam , f. عجماء ‘ajmā’ , pl. اعاجم a‘ājim  speaking incorrect Arabic; dumb, speechless; barbarian, non-Arab, foreigner, alien; a Persian 593
اعجمي a‘jamī non-Arabic; non-Arab, foreigner, alien; a Persian
معجم mu‘jam incomprehensible, unintelligible, obscure (language, speech); dotted, provided with a diacritical point (letter); (pl. معاجم ma‘ājim ) dictionary, lexicon │ المعجم حروف the letters of the alphabet
عجن ‘ajana i u (‘ajn) to knead (ھ s.th.); to soak (ھ s.th.) │ مسألة في وعجن لت (latta, mas’ala) to bring up a problem time and again, harp on a question
عجان ‘ijān perineum (anat.)
عجان ‘ajjān, f. ة dough kneader
عجين ‘ajīn dough, batter, paste; pastes (such as noodles, vermicelli, spaghetti, etc.)
عجينة ‘ajīna a piece of dough; dough; soft mass, soggy mixture; pl. عجائن ‘ajā’in  plastics
عجيني ‘ajīnī doughy, doughlike, pasty, paste-like
معجن mi‘jan pl. معاجن ma‘ājin  kneading trough; kneading machine
معجون ma‘jūn pl. معاجين ma‘ājīn  paste, cream (cosmet.); putty; electuary; majoon (confection made of hemp leaves, henbane, datura seeds, poppy seeds, honey and ghee, producing effects similar to those of hashish and opium) │ معجون األسنان tooth paste
معجنات mu‘ajjanāt (pot) pies, pasties
عجوة ‘ajwa pressed dates │ عجوة اقراص a pastry made of rich dough with almonds and date paste (syr.)
عد ‘adda u (‘add) to count, number, reckon (ھ s.th., من .s.o. among); to enumerate (ھ s.th.); to compute, calculate (ھ s.th.); to regard (ه ,ھ ھ s.o., s.th. as), look (ه ,ھ ھ at s.o., at s.th. as), consider, think, deem (ه ,ھ ھ s.o., s.th. to be s.th.); pass. ‘udda to be considered, go (ھ as s.th.), pass (ھ for s.th.); to amount (ب to)
breathing s.o.’s count (to عد األنفاس عليه │
=) to watch closely over s.o., keep a sharp eye on s.o., watch s.o.’s every move; ھ عد على to put down, or charge, s.th. to s.o.’s disadvantage; يعد ال (yu‘addu) numberless,
 countless, innumerable II to count off, enumerate (ھ s.th.); to make numerous, multiply, compound (ھ s.th.) │ الميت عدد (mayyita) to enumerate the merits of a dead person, eulogize s.o. IV to prepare (ل ه ھ، s.o., s.th. for); to ready, make ready, get ready (ه ھ، ل s.o., s.th. for); to prepare, finish, fit, fix up, adapt, adjust, dress, arrange, dispose, set up, make (ه ل
s.th. for), draw up, draft, work out (ھ e.g.. a report); to prepare (ھ one’s lesson)
│ ل عدته اعد (‘uddatahū) to make one’s preparations for, prepare o.s. for V to be or become numerous, be manifold, be multifarious, be multiple; to multiply, increase in number, proliferate, be compounded VIII to regard (ه ھ، ھ s.o., s.th. as), look (ه ھ، ھ at s.o., at s.th. as), consider, think, deem (ه ھ، ھ s.o., s.th. to be s.th.); to reckon (ب with), rely (ب upon); to put down (ب ھ، s.th., ل to s.o.’s credit, على to s.o.’s disadvantage); to hold (على ب against s.o. s.th.), take exception ( على ب to s.o. because of s.th.); to provide o.s., equip o.s. (ب with); (of a woman) to observe the iddat, or legally prescribed period of waiting, before contracting a new marriage X to get ready, ready o.s.; to stand prepared, keep in readiness, stand by; to prepare o.s.; to be ready, willing, prepared (ل for, to do s.th.)
عد ‘add counting, count; enumeration, listing; computation, calculation
عدة ‘udda readiness, preparedness; -- (pl. عدد ‘udad) equipment, outfit; implement, instrument, tool; gadget, device, appliance, contrivance; rigging, 594 tackle, sails; harness (of a horse) │ أخذ ل عدته (اعد) (a‘adda) to make one’s preparations for, prepare o.s. for; s.th. أخذ الشيء عدة to make preparations for s.th.; عدة الساعة clockwork, watchwork
عدة ‘idda number; (attributively:) several, numerous, many, e.g., عدة رجال (‘iddatun) many men, مرات عدة ‘iddata marrātin several times; iddat, legally prescribed period of waiting during which a woman may not remarry after being widowed or divorced (Isl. Law)
عدد ‘adad pl. اعداد a‘dād number, numeral; figure, digit, cipher; quantity;
number, issue (of a newspaper) │ خاص عدد (kāṣṣ) special number, special issue (e.g., of a periodical)
عددي ‘adadī numerical, numeral, relative to a number or numbers
عديد ‘adīd (with foll. genit.) counted among or with; numerous; number; large quantity; equal) │ عديد عدد (‘adad) enormous quantity, great multitude; ھذا ذاك عديد this equals that
عداد’adād pl. -āt counter, meter (for electricity, gas, etc.)
معداد mi‘dād pl. معاديد ma’ādīd  abacus
تعداد ta‘dād counting, count; enumeration, listing; computation, calculation │ األنفس تعداد t. al-anfus census
عداد ‘idād number, quantity │ له عداد ال (‘idāda) innumerable, countless; عداد في among, e.g., عدادھم في ھو he is counted among them, he is one of them
اعداد i‘dād preparation, readying, arranging, setting up, making, drawing up, drafting
اعدادي i‘dadī preparatory │ اعدادية شھادة (šahāda) certificate granted after completing four years of secondary school (eg.)
تعدد ta‘addud variety, diversity, multiplicity, plurality, great number, multitude │ اآللھة تعدد polytheism; تعدد الزوجات t. az-zajāt polygamy
اعتداد i‘tidād confidence, reliance, trust ( ب in) │ بنفسه االعتداد (bi-nafsihī) self- confidence, self-reliance
استعداد isti‘dād readiness, willingness, preparedness; (pl. -āt) inclination, tendency, disposition, propensity; predisposition (ل for a disease), susceptibility (ل to a disease); pl. conveniences, amenities, comfort │ كان
ل استعداد على to be prepared, be set for ...; to be ready, willing, inclined, in a position to
...
استعدادي isti‘dādī preparatory
معدود ma‘dūd countable, numerable, calculable; limited in number, little, few, a few, some
 معددة mu‘addida (hired) female mourner
معد mu‘add destined, intended (ل for); ready, prepared (ل forو to do s.th.), willing (ل to do s.th.)
معدات mu‘addāt equipment, material, materiel, gear; appliances, devices, implements, gadgets) عسكرية) حربية معدات) (ḥarbīya, ‘askarīya) war material; معدات الحريق m. al-ḥarīq fire-fighting equipment
متعدد muta‘addid manifold, multiple, plural, numerous, varied, variegated, various, diverse, different; multi-, many-, poly- (in compounds) الخاليا متعدد m. al- kalāya multicellular (biol.); النواحي متعدد m. an-nawāḥī multifarious, variegated, varied, manifold
مستعد musta‘idd prepared, ready (ل for); inclined, in a position (ل to, to do s.th.); predisposed (ل for), susceptible (ل to, esp. to a disease)
عدس ‘adas (coil.; n. un. ة) lentil(s)
عدسة ‘adasa pl. -āt lens; magnifying glass; object lens, objective
عدسي ‘adasī lenticular 595
عدل ‘adala i (‘adl, عدالة ‘adāla) to act justly, equitably, with fairness │ بينھم عدل to treat everyone with indiscriminate justice, not to discriminate between them; -- ‘adala i to be equal (ه ,ھ to s.o., to s.th.), be equivalent (ھ to s.th.), be on a par (ه ,ھ with), be the equal (ه of s.o.), equal, match (ه ,ھ s.o., s.th.), counterbalance, outweigh (ھ s.th.); to make equal, equalize, level (ب ه s.o. with another), place (ه s.o.) on the same level or footing (ب with another); -- ‘adala i (عدول ‘udūl) to deviate, swerve, deflect, turn away (عن الى from -- toward); to digress, depart, refrain, desist, abstain, avert o.s., turn away (عن from), leave off, relinquish. abandon, renounce, disclaim, give up, forego, waive, drop (عن s.th.) │ عن به عدل to make s.o. desist, abstain or turn away from; الى ببصره عدل (bi-baṣarihī) to let one’s eyes stray to or toward; -- ‘adula u (عدالة ‘adāla) to be just, fair, equitable II to straighten, make or put straight, set in order, array (ھ s.th.); to balance, right, rectify, put in order, straighten out, fix, settle, adjust (ھ s.th.); to make (ھ s.th.) just; to adapt (ھ s.th.); to
change, alter, commute, amend, modify, improve (ھ s.th.); to modulate (ھ current, waves; el.) III to be equal (ه ,ھ to s.o., to s.th.), be equivalent (ھ to s.th.), be on a par (ه ,ھ with), be the equal (ه of s.o.), equal, match (ه ,ھ s.o., s.th.), counterbalance, outweigh (ھ s.th.); to equate, treat as equal (وبين -- بين two persons or things) IV to straighten, make or put straight (ھ s.th.) V to he changed, be altered, be commuted, be modified, undergo modification, change or alteration VI to be in a state of equilibrium, be balanced; to be equal, be on a par; to offset one another, strike a balance VIII to straighten (up), tense; to draw o.s. up, sit straight, sit up; to be straight, even, balanced; to be moderate, be temperate
عدل ‘adl straightness, straightforwardness; justice, impartiality; fairness, equitableness, probity, honesty, uprightness; equitable composition, just compromise; -- (pl. عدول ‘udūl) just, equitable, fair, upright, honest; person of good reputation, person with an honorable record (Isl. Law); juristic adjunct assigned to a cadi (Magr.); عدال ‘adlan equitably, fairly, justly │ العدل وزير minister of justice
عدلي ‘adlī forensic, legal, judicial, juridical, juristic
عدل ‘idl equal, tantamount, corresponding; -- (pl. اعدال a‘dāl, عدول ‘udūl) either of the two balanced halves of a load carried by a beast of burden; sack, bag
عديل ‘adīl equal, like, tantamount, corresponding; (with foll. genit.) equal (to s.o.), on a par (with s.o.); (eg.; pl. عدائل ‘adā’il) brother-in-law (husband of one’s sister)
عدول ‘udūl refraining, abstention, desistance (عن from), forgoing, renunciation, resignation, abandonment, relinquishment (عن of s.th.)
عدالة ‘adāla justice, fairness, impartiality; probity, integrity, honesty, equitableness; decency, proper conduct; honorable record (Isl. Law)
 عدلية ‘adlīya justice, administration of justice, jurisprudence │ العدلية وزير minister of justice
اعدل a‘dal  more regular, more uniform; more balanced; juster, fairer, more equitable; more upright, more honest, more righteous
تعديل ta‘dīl straightening, straightening out, settling, setting right; -- (pl. -āt) change, alteration, commutation, 596 amendment, modification; settlement, adjustment, regulation; improvement; reshuffle (of the cabinet); modulation (el.)
│ وزاري تعديل (wizārī) cabinet reshuffle
معادلة mu‘ādala assimilation, approximation, adjustment, equalization, leveling, balancing, equilibration; balance, equilibrium; equality; equivalence; evenness, proportion, proportionateness, proportionality; equation (math.)
تعادل ta‘ādul balance, equilibrium; equality; equivalence; evenness, proportion, proportionateness, proportionality; draw, tie (in sports) │ األصوات تعادل tie vote, equal number of votes
اعتدال i‘tidāl straightness, erectness, tenseness; evenness, symmetry, proportion (e.g., of stature, of growth); moderateness, moderation, temperance, temperateness; equinox │ االعتدال سمت simt al-i. equinoctial colure (astron.)
اعتدالي i‘tidālī equinoctial
عادل ‘ādil just, fair, equitable; upright, honest, straightforward, righteous
معدل mu‘addal average; average amount or sum │ السرعة معدل m. as-sur‘a average speed; بمعدل as an average, on the average
معادل mu‘ādil equal, of equal status, having equal rights
متعادل muta‘āadil balanced, neutral
معتدل mu‘tadil straight, even, proportionate, symmetrical, harmonious; moderate, temperate; mild, clement (weather) │ المعتدلة المنطقة (minṭaqa) the Temperate Zone
عدم ‘adima a (‘udm, ‘adam) to be deprived, be devoid, be in want, be deficient (ھ of s.th.); to lack, not to have (ھ s.th:); to lose, miss (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); -- pass. ‘udima to be lacking, be missing, be absent, be nonexistent; to be loot, be gone, have disappeared; to disappear, vanish IV to cause (ه s.o.) to miss or lack (ھ s.th.); to deprive (ه ھ s.o. of s.th.); to destroy, annihilate, wipe out (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to execute (ه s.o.); to be or become poor, be reduced to poverty, become impoverished VII = pass. I
عدم ‘adam non-being, nonexistence; nothing, nothingness, nihility; lack, want, absence; loss, privation; (with foll. genit.) non-, un-, in-, dis-; (pl. اعدام a‘dām) nonentity, nullity, banality, trifle │ عدم االھتمام inattention, indifference; عدم االختصاص noncompetency; الوجود عدم non- being, nonexistence
عدمي ‘adamī nihilist
عدمية ‘adamīya non-being, nonexistence; nihilism
عديم ‘adīm not having, lacking, wanting; deprived (of); devoid (of), without, -less, in-, un- (with foll. genit.) │ الحياة عديم ‘a. al-ḥayāh inanimate, lifeless; النظير عديم unequaled, incomparable, unique
اعدام i‘dām destruction, annihilation; execution │ باإلعدام الحكم (ḥukm) death sentence
اعدامية i‘dāmīya headcloth without ‘iqāl
(as a sign of mourning)
انعدام in‘idām absence, lack, nonexistence
عادم ‘ādim pl. عوادم ‘awādim  nonexistent, lost; unrestorable, irreclaimable; waste- (in compounds); pl. waste, refuse, scraps │ العادمة المياه sewage, sullage, waste water; األقطان عوادم cotton waste; العوادم انبوبة unbūbat al-‘a. exhaust pipe (automobile)
معدوم ma‘dūm nonexistent, wanting, lacking, absent; missing; lost; gone, vanished
معدوم mu‘dim poor, destitute; impoverished 597
 عدن ‘adn Eden, Paradise; ‘adan  Aden (city in southern Arabia)
معدن ma‘din pl. معادن ma‘ādin  mine; lode; metal; mineral; treasure-trove, bonanza (fig.); (place of) origin, source │ المعادن علم ‘ilm al-m. mineralogy; معدنه امتحن to probe into s.o.’s very nature
معدن ma‘dan (eg.; syr, ma‘din) very good! bravo! well done!
المعدنيات mineral; metallic, ma‘dinī معدني
mineralogy │ معدني ماء mineral water
تعدين ta‘dīn mining of metals and minerals; mining, mining industry
معدن mu‘addin miner
عدنان ‘adnān  legendary ancestor of the North Arabs
عدو) عدا) ‘adā u (‘adw) to run, speed, gallop, dash, race; to pass (ه ھ، or عن s.o., s.th.), go past s.o. or s.th. (ه ھ، or عن); to give up, abandon, leave (ه ھ، or عن s.o., s.th.); to pass over, bypass, omit (ه s. o.), not to bother (ه ب s.o. with), exempt, except (ب ب s.o. from); to cross, overstep, exceed, transcend (ھ s.th.), go beyond s.th. (ھ); to exceed the proper bounds; to infect (الى s.o.); -- u (عدو ‘adw, ‘udūw, عداء ‘adā’, عدوان ‘udwān, ‘idwān) to engage in aggressive, hostile action, commit an aggression, a hostile act (على against); to act unjustly (على toward), wrong (على s.o.); to assail, assault, attack, raid (على s.o., s.th.); -- u (عدو ‘adw) to handicap, hamper, impede, obstruct (ه عن s.o. in); to prevent, hinder (ه عن s.o. from) │ طوره عدا (ṭaurahū) to transcend one’s bounds or limits; يفعله ان يعدو ال not to rail to do s.th.; to do s.th. inevitably; يكون ان يعدو ال ... it is no more than , it is only or merely ... II to cause to cross, overstep, exceed or transcend; to ferry (ه s.o., over a river); (gram.) to make transitive (ھ a verb); to give up, abandon, leave (ه ھ، or عن s.o., s.th.); to cross (ھ s.th., e.g., a river) III to treat as an enemy (ه s.o.), show enmity (ه toward s.o.), be at war, feud (ه with s.o.); to fall out (ه with s.o.), contract the enmity (ه of s.o.); to act hostility (ه toward s.o.); to counteract, disobey (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), act in opposition (ه ھ، to), contravene, infringe ( ھ s.th.) IV to infect (ه s.o., من with a
disease) V to cross, overstep (ھ s.th.); to traverse (ھ s.th.); to exceed, transcend, surpass (ھ s.th.). go beyond s.th. (ھ); to go beyond s.th. (ھ) and turn one’s attention to s.th. else (الى), not to be limited to s.th. (ھ) but also to comprise ( الى s.th. else), extend beyond s.th. (ھ) to s.th. else (الى); to overtake, pass, outstrip, outdistance, leave behind (ھ s.th.); to overcome, surmount (ھ s.th., e.g., a crisis); to pass on, shift, spread (الى to); to transgress, infract, violate, break (ھ s.th., e.g., laws); to engage in brutal, hostile action, commit aggression, a hostile act ( على against); to act unjustly (على toward s.o.); to assail, assault, attack, raid (على s.o., s.th.); to infringe, encroach, make inroads (على upon) │ بالضرب عليه تعدى (ḍarb) to come to blow, with s.o., lay hands upon s.o. VI to harbor mutual enmity, be hostile to one another, be enemies VII to be infected (ب with a disease), catch an infection (من by, from) VIII to cross, overstep (ھ s.th.); to exceed, transcend, surpass (ھ s.th.), go beyond s.th. (ھ); to act outrageously, brutally, unlawfully (على against); to commit excesses (على against); to engage in aggressive, brutal, hostile action (على against), commit an aggression, a hostile act (على against); to act unjustly (على toward); to violate (على a woman); to assail, assault, attack, raid (على s.o., s.th.), infringe, encroach, make inroads (على upon), make an attempt on s.o.’s (على) Iif. X to appeal for assistance (٨٩٥ ه to s.o. على against); to stir up, rouse, incite (ه على
s.o. against)
عدا ‘adā, عدا ما or عدا فيما fī-mā ‘adā (with foll. acc. or genit.) except, save, with the exception of, excepting ...; عدا فيما ذلك besides
عدو ‘adw running, run, race (also in sports)
عدوة ‘udwa side, slope (of a volley), bank, embankment (of a river), shore
‘idan, عدى a‘dā’, اعداء pl. ‘aduw عدو عدوة f. a‘ādin, اعاد ‘udāh, عداة ‘udan, (ladūd, )عدو لدود )لديد، الد │ enemy ‘adūwa archenemy foe, aladd)
عدوة ‘adūwa fem. of عدو ‘adūw
 عدى ‘adīy acting hostilely, aggressive
عداء ‘adā’ enmity, hostility, antagonism, animosity; aggression
عدائي ‘adā’ī hostile, inimical, antagonistic, aggressive
عداء ‘adā’ runner, racer
the l-a‘dā’ a. اعدى األعداء a‘dā: اعدى enemies of worst
عدوى ‘adwd infection, contagion; --
‘udwā hostile action
عداوة ‘adāwa pl. -āt enmity, hostility, antagonism, animosity
عدواء ‘udawā’  hindrance, handicap, impediment; inconvenience, nuisance, discomfiture │ عدواء ذو rough, rugged, uneven; adverse, discomfiting, inconvenient; bad, poor (mount)
عدوان ‘udwān, ‘idwān enmity, hostility, hostile action, aggression
of policy سياسة عدوانية ‘udwānī: عدواني aggression
معدى ma‘dan escape, way out, avoidance │ منه معدى ال (ma‘dā) inevitable, unavoidable, inescapable
معدية ma‘diya pl. معاد ma‘ādin ferry, ferryboat
تعدية ta‘diya ferrying, ferry service; conversion into the transitive form (gram.)
تعد ta‘addin crossing, overstepping, exceeding, transcending; overtaking, passing (e.g., of an automobile); -- (pl. تعديات ta‘addiyāt) infraction, violation, breach (e.g., of laws), transgression, encroachment, inroad (على on), infringement of the law; offense against law, tort, delict (Isl. Law); attack, assault; aggression
اعتداء i‘tidā’ pl. -āt attack, assault, raid, inroad (على on), attempt (على on s.o.’s life), criminal attack (على on); outrage (على upon); aggression (على against; esp. pol.) االعتداء عدم (اتفاق) معاھدة mu‘āhadat (ittifāq) ‘adam al-i‘t. pact of nonaggression
عاد ‘ādin pl. عواد ‘awādin aggressive, attacking, assailing, raiding; (pl. عداة ‘udāh) enemy │ الوحوش عواد beasts of prey, predatory animals
عادية ‘ādiya pl. -āt, عواد ‘awādin wrong, offense, misdeed, outrage; adversity, misfortune, reverse; obstacle, impediment, obstruction; pi. vicissitudes │ عليھم عدت عواد (‘adal) fate dealt them heavy blows, they fell on evil days
معاد mu‘ādin hostile, inimical, antagonistic
معد mu‘din contagious, infectious │ معدية امراض contagious diseases
متعد muta‘addin transitive (gram.); aggressor, assailant
معتد mu‘tadin pl. -ūn assailant, assassin; aggressor (pol.)
عذب ‘aduba u (عذوبة ‘udūba) to be sweet, pleasant, agreeable; -- ‘adaba i to 599 hinder, handicap, impede, obstruct (ه s.o.) II to afflict, pain, torment, try, agonize, torture, rack (ه s.o.); to punish, chastise, castigate (ه s.o.) V to be punished, suffer punishment; to feel pain, suffer; to torment s.o., be in agony, be harassed X to find (ھ s.th.) sweet, pleasant, or agreeable; to think (ھ s.th.) beautiful, nice
عذب ‘adb pl. عذاب ‘idāb sweet; pleasant, agreeable │ عذب مياه fresh water; عذب الحديث entertaining, amusing, companionable, personable
عذاب ‘adāb pl. -āt, اعذبة a‘diba pain, torment, suffering, agony, torture; punishment, chastisement, castigation
عذوبة ‘udūba sweetness
اعذب a‘dab  sweeter, more pleasant, more agreeable
تعذيب ta‘dīb affliction, tormenting, agonizing, torture, torturing; punishment, chastisement, castigation
عذر ‘adara i (‘udr, عذر ma‘dira) to excuse, absolve from guilt (ه s.o.), forgive (عن or ه في s.o. s.th.) │ يعذرني لم he wouldn’t let me give any excuses, he wouldn’t take no for an answer, he kept insisting; -- ‘adara i (‘adr) to circumcise ( ه s.o.) IV = I; to have an excuse │ من اعذر انذر (man a‘dara) he who warns is excused V to be difficult, impossible, impracticable, unfeasible (على for) VIII to excuse o.s. apologize (ل من or الى to s.o.
 for s.th.); to give or advance (ب s.th.) as an excuse (عن or من for), plead s.th. (ب) in defense of (عن or من) X to wish to be excused; to make an apology, excuse o.s., apologize
عذر ‘udr pl. اعذار a‘dār excuse │ عذر ابو abū ‘u. (with foll. genit.) responsible for, answerable for; التطور ھذا عذر ابو ھو (taṭawwur) he is the originator of this development
عذرة ‘udra virginity, virginhood; name of an Arab tribe │ عذر ابو = عذرة ابو see above
عذري ‘udrī belonging to the tribe of
‘udra (see above)
love platonic (hawā) الھوى العذري
عذار ‘idār pl. عذر ‘udur cheek; fluff, first growth of heard (on the cheeks); cheekpiece (of a horse’s harness) │ خلع عذاره to throw off all restraint, drop all pretenses of shame; العذار خالع unrestrained, wanton, uninhibited
عذراء ‘adrā’  pl. عذارى ‘adārā virgin; العذراء Virgo (astron.); the Virgin Mary (Chr.) │ عذراء فتاة (fatāh) maiden, virgin
معذرة ma‘dira pl. معاذر ma‘ādir  excuse, forgiveness, pardon
معذار mi‘dār pl. معاذير ma’ādīr  excuse, plea
تعذر ta‘addur difficulty, impossibility, impracticability, unfeasibility
اعتذار i‘tidār apology, excuse, plea
معذور ma‘dūr excused, justified, warranted; excusable
متعذر muta‘addir difficult, impossible, impracticable, unfeasible
عذق ‘idq pl. اعذاق a‘dāq bunch, cluster (of dates, of grapes)
عذل ‘adala u (‘adl) to blame, censure, reprove, rebuke, reproach (ه s.o.) II = I
عذل ‘adl blame, censure, reproof, reproach
عذول ‘adūl stem censurer, rebuker, severe critic
‘ādila عاذلة f. ‘uddāl, عذال pl. ‘ādil عاذل
pl. عواذل ‘awādil  censurer, reprover, critic
(عذو and عذا (عذى ‘adā u and عذى ‘adiya a to be healthy (country, city; due to its climate, air, etc.) 600
عر ‘arra u to be a shame, be a disgrace (ه ھ، for s.o., for s.th.); to bring shame or disgrace (ه ھ، upon s.o., upon s.th.), disgrace, dishonor (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.)
عرة ‘urra scabies, mange; dung; a disgraceful, shameful thing
عرر ‘arar scabies, mange
معرة ma‘arra shame, disgrace, ignominy; stain, blemish, stigma
معتر mu‘tarr miserable, wretched; scoundrel, rogue
عرب II to Arabicize, make Arabic (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.): to translate into Arabic (ھ s.th.); to express, voice, state clearly, declare (عن s.th.); to give earnest money, give a handsel, make a down payment IV to Arabicize, make Arabic (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), give an Arabic form (ھ to s.th.); to make plain or clear, state clearly, declare (عن or ھ s.th.), express (unmistakably), utter, voice, proclaim, make known, manifest, give to understand (عن s.th., esp. a sentiment), give expression (عن to s.th., esp. to a sentiment); (gram.) to use desinential inflection, pronounce the i‘rāb V to assimilate o.s. to the Arab, become an Arab, adopt the custom, of the Arabs X = V
عرب ‘arab (coll.) pl. عروب ‘urūb, اعرب a‘rub, عربان ‘urbān, اعراب a‘rāb Arabs; true Arabs, Arabs of the desert, Bedouins
عربي ‘arabī Arab, Arabic, Arabian; truly Arabic; an Arab; العربية the ‘Arabīya, the language of the ancient Arabs; classical, or literary, Arabic
عربة ‘araba a swift river; (pl. -āt) carriage, vehicle, wagon, cart; (railroad) car, coach; araba, coach │ األجرة عربة ‘a. al-ujra cab, hack, hackney; األكل عربة ‘a. al-akl dining car, diner; رش عربة ‘a. rašš
water wagon, sprinkling wagon; ركوب عربة cab, hack, hackney; الشحن عربة ‘a. aš-šaḥn wagon, lorry; freight car; مطعم عربة (maṭ‘am) dining car, diner; األطفال عربة baby carriage; النقل عربة ‘a. an-naql wagon, lorry, van; freight car; النوم عربة ‘a. an-
 naum sleeping car, sleeper; يد عربة ‘a. yad
handcart, pushcart; wheelbarrow
عربية ‘arabīya pl. -āt carriage, vehicle; araba, coach; see عربي
عربجي ‘arbajī pl. -īya coachman, cabman
عربخانة ‘arbakāna car shed, coach house
عراب ‘arrāb godfather, sponsor
عرابة arrāba godmother, sponsor
اعرابي a‘rābī pl. اعراب a‘rāb an Arab of the desert, a Bedouin
عروبة ‘urūba Arabism, Arabdom, the Arab idea, the Arab character
تعريب ta‘rīb Arabicizing, Arabization; translation into Arabic; incorporation (of loanwords) into Arabic
اعراب i‘rāb manifestation, declaration, proclamation, pronouncement, utterance; expression (عن of a sentiment); desinential inflection (gram.)
معرب mu‘arrib translator into Arabic
معرب mu‘arrab Arabicized; translated into Arabic
معرب mu‘rab desinentially inflective (gram.)
مستعرب musta‘rib Arabist
عربد ‘arbada to be quarrelsome, be contentious, pick quarrels; to be noisy, boisterous, riotous, raise a din
عربد ‘arbada quarrelsomeness, contentiousness; noise, din, uproar, riot
عربيد ‘irbīd quarrelsome, contentious; noisy, boisterous, riotous
معربد mu‘arbid quarrelsome, contentious; noisy, boisterous, riotous
عربس ‘arbasa to upset, disturb, confuse (ه s.o.) 601
عربن ‘arbana to give earnest money, give a handsel, make a down payment (ه to s.o.)
عربون ‘urbūn, ‘arabūn pl. عرابين ‘arābīn  handsel, earnest money, down payment; pledge, pawn, gage
عرج ‘araja u (عروج ‘urūj) to ascend, mount, rise; -- ‘arija a (‘araj) to be lame, walk lamely, limp, hobble II to turn (على to, toward); to stop, halt, stop over (على in, at); to turn (عن off s.th.), swerve (عن from); to lame, cripple, paralyze (ه s.o.); to zigzag, make zigzag (ھ s.th.) IV to lame, cripple, paralyze (ه s.o.) V to zigzag, follow a zigzag course VII to incline, lean, bend, curve; to be or become crooked, curved, bent, sinuous, winding
عرج ‘araj lameness
اعرج a‘raj , f. عرجاء ‘arjā’ , pl. عرج ‘urj, عرجان ‘urjān lame, limping; -- jack (in a deck of cards)
معرج ma‘raj pl. معارج ma‘ārij  place of ascent; (route of) ascent
معرج mi‘raj pl. معارج ma‘ārij  ladder, stairs
معراج mi‘rāj; pl. معاريج ma‘ārīj  ladder, stairs; المعراج the midnight journey to the seven heavens (made by Mohammed on the 27  of Rajab, from Jerusalem) │ ليلة المعراج lailat al-m. the night of Mohammed’s ascension to the seven heavens
تعاريج ta‘ārīj  (pl.) curves, curvatures, bends, turns, twists, windings, sinuosities; wavy lines, serpentines
تعرج ta‘arruj zigzag (course)
متعرج muta‘arrij winding, twisting, tortuous, sinuous; zigzag
منعرج mun‘arij crooked, curved, bent, winding, twisting, tortuous, sinuous
منعرج mun‘araj pl. -āt bend, turn, curve, twist, angle (of roads, etc.)
عرزال ‘irzāl hut or shack of the rural warden (usually in a tree or on top of a roof)
عرس II (nejd.) to marry (ه ب s.o. to) IV to arrange a wedding feast
عرسات a‘rās, اعراس pl. ‘urus ‘urs, عرس
‘urusāt marriage; wedding, wedding feast
عرس ‘irs pl. اعراس a‘rās husband; wife
‘irs banāt بنات عرس pl. ‘irs ibn ابن عرس │
weasel (zool.)
عرسة ‘irsa weasel
 عروس ‘arūs pl. عرس ‘urus bridegroom;
f. (pl. عرائس ‘arā’is) bride; doll; العروسان al-‘arūsān bride and groom, the newlyweds │ النيل عرائس ‘a. an-nīl lotus
عروسة ‘arūsa pl. عرائس ‘arā’is  bride; doll, baby doll │ البرقع عروسة ‘a. al-burqu‘ metal tubes ornamenting the veil of Muslim women
عريس ‘arīs bridegroom
عريس ‘irrīs lair of a lion, lion’s den
عرش ‘araša i u to erect a trellis (ھ for grapevines), train on a trellis or espalier, to trellis, to espalier (ھ vines) II to roof over (ھ s.th.)
a‘rāš اعراش ‘urūš, عروش pl. ‘arš عرش
throne; tribe (magr.)
عريش ‘arīš pl. عرش ‘uruš, عرائش ‘arā’iš  arbor, bower; hut made of twigs; booth, shack, shanty; trellis (for grapevines); shaft, carriage pole
العريش El Arish (town in N Egypt, on Mediterranean)
تعريشة ta‘rīša pl. تعاريش ta‘ārīš  trellis, lattice-work; arbor, bower
عرص ‘araṣa a (‘araṣ) to be lively, gay, merry
عرص ‘arṣa pl. ‘araṣāt, اعراص a‘rāṣ
vacant lot; courtyard, court of a house
معرص mu‘arraṣ pimp, procurer; cuckold 602
 عرض ‘aruḍa u to be or become wide, broad, to widen, broaden; -- ‘araḍa i (‘arḍ) to become visible, appear (ل to s.o.); to get in s.o.’s (ل) way; to happen (ل to s.o.), befall (ل s.o.); to occur (ل to s.o.), come to s.o.’s
(ل) mind; to turn (ل to s.o., to s.th.); to take care (ل of), concern o.s. (ل with), turn one’s attention, put one’s mind, apply o.s., attend (ل to), go in (ل for), go into s.th. ( ل), enter, embark (ل upon), take up, treat ( ل s.th.), deal (ل with); to show, demonstrate, present, set forth, display, exhibit, lay open, submit, turn in (ھ على s.th. to s.o.), lay, put (ھ على s.th. before s.o.); to show (ھ e.g., a film), stage (ھ e.g., a play); to offer, suggest, propose (
ھ على s.th. to s.o.); to subject (ھ على s.th. to a critical examination, and the like); to inspect (ھ s.th.); to review (ھ troops),
pass in review (ھ s.th., also before one’s mental eye); pass. ‘uriḍa to be or go mad, insane │ عارض له عرض an obstacle arose in his path; خاطر له عرض a thought occurred to him, he had an idea II to make wide or broad, widen, broaden, extend (ھ s.th.); to expose (ه ھ، ل s.o., s.th. to s.th., esp. to risk: ھ ل s.th. to the sun); to intimate, insinuate (ل or ب s.th.), allude (ل or ب to), hint (ل or ب at) │ للنور عرضه to hold s.th. against the light III to offer resistance (ه ھ، to s.o., to s.th.), resist (ھ, s.o., s.th.), work against s.o. or s.th. (ه ھ،); to contradict, oppose (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), raise objections, protest, remonstrate (ه ھ، against s.o., against s.th.); to be against
s.o. or s.th. (ھ, .); to avoid, shun (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to compare (ھ ب s.th. with) IV to turn away, avert o.s. (ب from), avoid, shun (عن s.o., s.th.), shirk (عن s.th.), give up, abandon, relinquish, discard, renounce, disclaim (عن s.th.); not to mention (عن s.th.): الى ... عن اعرض to turn away from s.th. and to s.th. else V to resist, oppose (ل s.o., s.th.), stand up (ل against), raise objections, object (ل to); to face (ل s.th., e.g., a problem); to interfere (ل with), meddle (ل in); to put one’s mind, turn one’s attention (ل to), go into s.th. (ل, e.g., a topic): to undertake (ل s.th.), embark (ل upon s.th.); to expose o.s., be exposed, be subjected (ل to s.th.); to run the risk (ل of), risk (ل doing or being s.th.); to dare, venture, risk (ل s.th.) VI to oppose one another; to be contradictory, conflict, be incompatible (مع with) VIII to betake o.s., go, present o.s. (ه to s.o.); to raise an objection, make objections, object (على to). veto (على s.th.), remonstrate, protest ( على against); to resist, oppose (على s.o., s.th.); to stand up (ل or ه ھ، against s.o., against s.th.), stand in, or obstruct, the way of s.o. or s.th. (ل or ه ھ،); to hinder impede, obstruct (ل s.o.); to happen (ه to s.o.), befall (ه s.o.) │ سبيله اعترض to block s.o.’s way X to ask to be shown (ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to pass in review (ھ s.th., esp. in one’s imagination, before one’s mental eye), call up, conjure up, call to one’s mind, picture to o.s., visualize (ھ s.th.); to weigh, consider, examine (ھs.th.); to inspect, review (ھ troops); to expound, set forth (ھ s.th.); to proceed ruthlessly; to
 massacre without much ado (ھم the enemy)
عرض ‘arḍ pl. عروض ‘urūḍ breadth; width; presentation, demonstration, staging, show(ing), performance; display, exposition, exhibition; submission, filing (e.g., of an application); proposition, proposal, offer, tender; parade; review (mil.); merchandise, goods │ بالعرض across, crosswise, in breadth; والطلب العرض (ṭalab) supply and demand; األزياء عرض ‘a. al-azyā’ fashion show; حال عرض ‘a. ḥāl or عرضحال pl. عرضحاالت ‘arḍuḥālāt application, petition, memorial; (درجة) خط العرض kaṭṭ (darajat) al-‘a. degree 603 of latitude; العرض شباك šubbāk al-‘a. show window; العرض يوم yaum al-‘a. the Day of Judgment, Doomsday
عرضي ‘arḍī cross- (in compounds), transverse, horizontal │ عرضي خط (kaṭṭ) latitudinal degree, geographical latitude
عرض ‘urḍ pl. اعراض a‘rāḍ honor, good repute; dignity │ عرضك في انا I rely on your generosity, have mercy upon me!
عرض ‘urḍ side; middle │ البحر عرض في (‘u. il-baḥr) at sea, on the high seas; القى الحائط عرض به (ضرب) to undervalue, scorn, disdain, despise, reject s.th.; to ruin, thwart, foil s.th.; to throw s.th. overboard, jettison s.th.; عرض عن اليه نظر (‘an ‘urdin) he looked askance at him, he gave him a slanting glance (contemptuously); عرض في الناس amid the crowd of people; عرض من ھو الناس he belongs to the common people
عرضاني ‘arḍānī transversal, transverse, latitudinal; measured crosswise
عرض ‘araḍ pl. اعراض a‘rāḍ accident (philos.); contingent, nonessential characteristic; s.th. nonessential, a contingent, s.th. accidental: symptom, manifestation of disease; عرضا ‘araḍan, بالعرض incidentally, by chance
عرضي ‘araḍī accidental (philos.), non- essential, unessential; incidental, accidental, contingent, fortuitous, casual; عرضيات ‘arādīyāt unessential incidents, unessentials; accidentals │ عرضية خطيئة venial sin (Chr.)
عرضة ‘urḍa target; (object of) intention, intent, design; object (ل of):
exposed, subject(ed), liable (ل to s.th.); (with foll. genit.) suitable for, fitting for, appropriate for
عروض ‘arūḍ prosody; (pl. اعاريض a‘ārīḍ ) last foot of the first hemistich │ العروض علم ‘ilm al-‘a. metrics, prosody
عروضي ‘arūḍī prosodic(al), metrical
عريض ‘arīḍ pl. عراض ‘irāḍ broad, wide; extensive, vast
‘arā’iḍ  عرائض pl. ‘arīḍa عريضة
petition, application, memorial
معرض ma‘riḍ pl. معارض ma‘āriḍ  place where s.th. is exhibited or displayed; showroom, stage; exposition, exhibition; show; fair (com.); (with foll. genit.) time, occasion for s.th. │ معرض في (with foll. genit.) in the form of ..., in ... manner; on the occasion of, at the occurrence or appearance of; معرض في اآلن لسنا ... (lasnā) with foll. verbal noun: this is not the place for us to ...; عن الكالم معرض في لسنا let us not speak of ... now, this is not the place to speak of ...; األزياء معرض m. al-azyā’ fashion show; الصحف معرض m. aṣ-ṣuḥuf press review
معرض mi‘raḍ wedding gown
معراض mi‘rāḍ: كالمه معراض في قال (m. kalāmihī) to mention casually, say among other things
تعريض ta‘rīḍ intimation, allusion, hint, indication
معارضة mu‘āraḍa opposition (esp. pol.); resistance, contradiction, remonstrance, objection, exception, protect; O resistance (el.)
اعراض i‘rāḍ shunning, avoidance, evasion; reluctance │ اعراض في reluctantly
تعارض ta‘āruḍ conflict, clash, antagonism, contradiction, contrariety
اعتراض i‘tirāḍ pl. -āt resistance, opposition, objection, exception, counterargument, counterassertion, counterblast, riposte, rebuttal, rejoinder, expostulation, remonstrance, protest; (right of) veto (Isl. Law) │ االعتراض حق ḥaqq al-i‘t. (right of) veto (pol.)
استعراض isti‘rāḍ examination, survey; parade, review; revue, musical show 604
 استعراضي isti‘rāḍī revue-, show- (in compounds), revue-like │ استعراضية فرقة (firqa) Show troupe; revue troupe; فلم استعراضي film musical
عارض ‘āriḍ pl. -ūn exhibitor (e.g., at a fair); demonstrator; -- (pl. عوارض ‘awāriḍ) obstacle, impediment, obstruction; temporary disturbance, anomalous condition (physically); attack, fit, spell; s.th. accidental, s.th. nonessential, an accidcnt; side of the face; -- العارضان the cheeks │ العارضين خفيف k. al-‘āriḍain having a sparse beard; الطريق عارض في in the middle of the road
عارضة āriḍa pl. -āt woman demonstrator, woman exhibitor; -- (pl. عوارض ‘awāriḍ ) side of the face; doorpost, jamb; crossbeam, transom; joist, girder; purlin; O anode (el.) │ العارضة قوة qūwat al-‘ā. eloquence; األزياء عارضة mannequin
عارضي ‘āridī accidental, casual, occasional
معروض ma‘rūd pl. معاريض ma‘ārīḍ  exposition, report; memorial, petition, application; -- pl. -āt propositions, proposals, offers, tenders; exhibits, exhibited articles
معارض mu‘āriḍ adversary, opponent, antagonist, opposer; contradicter
معترض mu‘tariḍ running or lying across, transversal, transverse; adversary, opponent, antagonist, opposer; contradicter; resistance (el.) │ معترضة جملة (jumla) parenthetical clause, parenthesis
 عرضي ‘urḍī (from Turk. ordu) military encampment, army camp
عرف ‘arafa i (معرفة ma‘rifa, عرفان ‘irfān) to know (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to recognize, perceive (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to be cognizant, be aware (ھ of s.th.), be acquainted (ھ with s.th.), to discover, experience, find out (ھ s.th.); to recognize, acknowledge ( ب s.th., ھ s.th. as being right; ھ ھ s.th. as); to concede, acknowledge (ھ ل s.th. to s.o.), allow (ھ ل for s.th. in s.o.); to approve (ھ of); to distinguish, differentiate (ه ھ، من s.o., s.th. from); pass. ‘urifa to be known (ب as, by the name of)
for know to l-m.) (ḥaqqa عرف حق المعرفة │
sure, be sure (of), be positive (about); الجميل له عرفت she was grateful to him, she appreciated his service, she gratefully acknowledged his service II to announce ( ه ھ to s.o. s.th.), inform, advise, apprise (ھ ه s.o. of), acquaint (ه ھ s.o. with s.th.); to introduce (الى or ه ب s.o. to s.o. else), have (ه s.o.) meet (الى or ب s.o. else), present (ب ه s.o. to s.o. else); to define (ھ s.th.); to determine, specify, characterize, explain ( ھ s.th.); (gram.) to make definite (ھ a noun); (Chr.) to confess (ه a penitent), hear the confession (ه of s.o.) V to become acquainted (ب or الى also على with s.o.), meet (ب or الى s.o.), make the acquaintance of s.o. (ب or الى); to make
o.s. known, disclose one’s identity, reveal
o.s. (الى to s.o.); to acquaint o.s., familiarize o.s. (ل. or الى with), get to know (على or الى s.th.); to sound, explore ( ھ s.th.); to trace, discover, uncover (ھ s.th.); (gram.) to be or become definite (noun) VI to become acquainted with one another, become mutually acquainted, get to know each other; to become acquainted (ب with); to come to know (ھ s.th.), learn (ھ about) VIII to confess, admit, acknowledge, own, avow (ھ s.th.); to recognize (ب s.o., s.th.), grant recognition (ب to s.o., to s.th.); to concede, acknowledge (ب ل s.th. to s.o.); to make a confession, to confess (Chr.) │ اعترف بالجميل to be grateful X to discern, recognize (ھ s.th.)
عرف ‘arf fragrance, perfume, scent, aroma 605
عرف ‘urf beneficence, kindness; custom, usage, practice, convention, tradition, habit; legal practice; custom, customary law (jur.); (pl. اعراف a‘rāf) crest, comb (or a rooster), mane (of a horse) │ عرفه في as was his wont, according to his habit; in his opinion; السياسي العرف (siyāsī) protocol
عرفي ‘urfī traditional, conventional, usual, common, customary, habitual; pertaining to secular legal practice (as opposed to šar‘ī); private, unofficial (as opposed to rasmī) │ العرفي الحكم (ḥukm) martial law; العرفية األحكام do.; عرفية محكمة (maḥkama) court-martial
 عرف ‘arīf pl. عرفاء ‘urafā’  knowing (ب s.th.), cognizant, aware (ب of s.th.); expert, authority, specialist; teaching assistant, monitor (an older pupil assisting the teacher of a Koran school); sergeant (Ir.); corporal (U.A.R); العرفاء رئيس a military rank, approx.: master sergeant (Ir., Syr.); عريف نائب approx.: corporal (Ir.); (pl. عرفان ‘irfān) teacher, esp. a teacher and precentor of congregational singing (Copt.-Chr.)
عراف ‘arrāf diviner, fortuneteller
عرافة ‘arrāfa pl. -āt (woman) fortuneteller
عرافة ‘irāfa fortuneteller’s trade; fortunetelling, divination
عرفات ‘arafāt Arafat, name of a mountain and adjacent plain, located four hours’ distance east of Mecca, where the Mecca pilgrims spend the 9th day of Zu’lhijja
عرفان ‘irfān cognition, knowledge, perception; recognition, acknowledgment
│ الجميل عرفان gratitude, thankfulness;
do. al-faḍl ‘i. عرفان الفضل
اعرف a‘raf  knowing better (ب s.th.), more cognizant. more knowledgeable (ب of), better acquainted. more conversant (ب with), more expert, more versed (ب in); a better connoisseur (ب of); (f. عرفاء ‘arfā’ ) having a crest or mane, crested, maned
معرفة ma‘rifa pl. معارف ma‘ārif  knowledge, learning, lore, information. Skill, know-how; cognition, intellection, perception, experience, realization; gnosis; acquaintance, cognizance, conversance, versedness; an acquainted person, an acquaintance, a friend; (gram.) definite noun; pl. المعارف cultural affairs, education │ بمعرفة by, through (after the passive); المعرفة مع knowingly, deliberately (jur.); العمومية المعارف وزير (‘umāmīya) minister of education; قومه في معرفة يكن لم (qaumihī) he was unknown among his people
معارف ma‘ārif  face, countenance, features
ta‘ārīf  تعاريف -āt, pl. ta‘rīf تعريف
announcement, notification,
communication, information; instruction, direction; (social) introduction; definition, determination, identification, specification, characterization; a rendering definite (gram.) │ التعريف اداة adāt at-t. (gram.) the definite article; التعريف بطاقة identity card
تعريفة ta‘rīfa notification, information, apprising; -- (pl. -āt, تعاريف ta‘ārīf ) tariff; price list
تعرف ta‘arruf acquaintance (ب or الى with); exploration, study; cognition, knowledge, perception, realization
اعتراف i‘tirāf recognition, acceptance; acknowledgment, avowal, admission, confession; (Chr.) confession │ ب اعترافا in recognition of; بالجميل االعتراف  (bi-l- jamīl) gratitude, thankfulness; االعتراف ابو father-confessor, confessor (Chr.); سر االعتراف sirr al-i‘t. sacrament of penance (Chr.); االعتراف معلم mu‘allim 606 al-i‘t. father-confessor, confessor (Chr.); من
ان االعتراف it must be admitted that ..., admittedly ...
عارف ‘ārif acquainted, conversant, familiar (ب with); connoisseur, expert; master (tun.)
عارفة ‘ārifa (syr.) sage, wise man (of a village or tribe)
معروف ma‘rūf known, well-known; universally accepted, generally recognized; conventional; that which is good, beneficial, or fitting, good, benefit; fairness, equity, equitableness; kindness, friendliness, amicability; beneficence; favor rendered, courtesy, mark of friendship; active voice (gram.) │ بالمعروف or بمعروف in (all) fairness; with appropriate courtesy, in a friendly manner, amicably; المعروف ناكر ungrateful; المعروف ان it is (well-) known that ..., as is well- known ..., it is commonly held that ..., it is generally understood that ...
متعارف muta‘āraf or عليه متعارف common, usual, customary; commonplace, trivial, trite, hackneyed, banal
معترف mu‘taraf confessor (in the hierarchy of saints; Chr.)
 به معترف mu‘taraf bihī recognized, accepted, admitted, granted, approved-of, licensed, authorized ھ ‘ariqa a (‘araq) to sweat, perspire II to make or let (ه s.o.) sweat, promote perspiration; to add water (ھ to a drink), dilute (ھ a drink); to take root, strike roots; to be deeply rooted; to vein, marble (ھ s.th.) IV to take root, strike roots V = IV
عرق ‘irq pl. عروق ‘urūq root; stem (of a plant, of a leaf); vein (bot., anat.); hereditary disposition; race, stock, descent
│ الذھب عرق ‘i. ad-dahab ipecac, ipecacuanha (bot.); سوس عرق ‘i. sūs licorice root; النسا عرق ‘i. an-nasā sciatica (med.); العرق طيب ṭīb al-‘i. noble descent; العرق طيب ṭayyib al-‘i. of noble descent, high born; دساس العرق (dassās) blood will tell, what ill bred in the bone will come out in the flesh; بعرق فيه ضرب to have a share in s.th., participate in s.th.
عرق ‘araq sweat, perspiration; arrack, a strong colorless liquor made of raisins, milky white when diluted with water
(esp. syr.; = eg. zabīb) │ القربة عرق ‘a. al-qirba pains, toil, exertion; زحالوي عرق (zaḥlāwī) a well-known brand of arrack made in Zahlé (Lebanon)
عرقة ‘araqa transom between two layers of stone or brick
عرقية ‘araqīya (eg.) white cotton skullcap often worn under the tarboosh)
عراقة ‘arāaqa deep-rootedness; ancient ancestral line, old family │ النسب في عراقة (nasab) noble descent
عراقية ‘arrāqīya (eg.) white cotton skullcap (often worn under the tarboosh)
عريق ‘arīq deep-rooted │ القدم في عريق (qidam) ancient; centuried, centuries-old; عريقة عائلة من from an old, respectable family; النسب عريق ‘a. an-nasab of noble descent, highborn
al-‘irāqān العراقان Iraq; al-‘irāq العراق
Basra and Kufa
عراق ‘irāqī Iraqi, Iraqian; (pl. -ūn) an Iraqi
اعرق a’raq  more deep-rooted
معروق ma‘rūq gaunt, emaciated, lean (face, hand, etc.)
معرق mu‘arriq sudorific, promoting perspiration
معرق mu‘arraq veined; mu‘riq firmly rooted │ القدم في معرق (mu‘riq, qidam) very old, ancient, centuried, centuries-old 607
عرقب ‘arqaba to hamstring (ھ an animal)
عرقوب ‘urqūb pl. عراقيب ‘arāqīb  Achilles’ tendon; hamstring; ‘urqūb name of a famed liar │ عرقوب من اكذب a greater liar than ‘Urqūb
عرقوبي ‘urqūbī false, deceitful (promise)
عرقل ‘arqala to render difficult, complicate, handicap, hinder, hamper, encumber, impede, obstruct, delay (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), throw obstacle, in the way of s.o. or s.th. ( ه ھ،); (tun.) to seize, confiscate, impound ( ھ s.th.) II ta‘arqala to be aggravated, rendered difficult, be or become complicated, be hindered, hampered, encumbered, impeded, obstructed, handicapped, delayed
عرقلة ‘arqala impeding, hindering, encumbering; -- (pl. عراقيل ‘arāqīl ) encumbrance, impediment, hindrance; obstacle, difficulty, handicap
عرك ‘araka u (‘ark) to rub (ھ s.th.); to turn, adjust (ھ the knobs of a radio, and the like) ; to play havoc (ھ with), damage severely (ھ s.th.); -- ‘arika a to be strong in battle, be a tough fighter III to fight, struggle, contend (ه with s.o.) VI to engage in a fight, fight one another VIII = VI
عرك ‘ark experience (gained through suffering)
عركة ‘arka fight, struggle, battle, combat
عريكة ‘arīka disposition, frame of mind, temper, nature
معركة ma‘raka, ma‘ruka pl. معارك ‘arik 
battlefield; battle
عراك ‘irāk struggle, fight, strife, battle, combat
 معاركة mu’āraka struggle, fight, strife, battle, combat
عرك mu’tarak fighting ground, battle ground
عرم II to heap up, pile up, stack (ھ s.th.) VIII to be vicious; to be stubborn, obstinate, headstrong
عرم ‘arim vicious; strong, violent, vehement, powerful, terrific; dam, dike │ عرم جيش (jaiš) numerous, huge army
عرام ‘urām viciousness (of character); violence, vehemence │ عرام سيل (sail) huge quantity, tremendous flood
عرمة ‘urma pl. عرم ‘uram heap, pile, bulk, mass, large amount, multitude
عرمة ‘arama pl. عرم ‘aram heap, pile, bulk, mass, huge amount, multitude
عارم ‘ārim vicious; tempestuous, violent, vehement, strong; tremendous, enormous, huge
عرمرم ‘aramram strong, violent, vehement │ عرمرم جيش (jaiš) a numerous, huge army
عرين ‘arīn pl. عرن ‘urun thicket; lair of a lion, lion’s den
عرينة ‘arīna pl. عرائن ‘arā’in  lair of a wild animal
عرنين ‘irnīn pl. عرانين ‘arānīn  upper part of the nose, bridge of the nose
عرناس ’irnās pl. عرانيس ‘arānīs  distaff │ عرناس ذرة ‘i. dura corncob (syr.)
عرو) عرا) ‘arā u (‘arw) and VIII to befall, grip, seize, strike, afflict (ه s.o.), come, descend (ه upon s.o.), happen (ه to s.o.); to take possession (ه of s.o.)
عروة ‘urwa pl. عرى ‘uran buttonhole; loop, noose, coil; ear, handle (of a jug, and the like); tie, bond, e.g., الصداقة عرى ‘u. aṣ- ṣadāqa bonds of friendship; support, prop, stay │ الوثقى العروة (wutqā) the firm, reliable grip or hold, the firm tie
عري ‘ariya a (‘ury, عرية ‘urya) to be naked, nude; to be free, be bare (عن of) │ ثيابه (من) عن عري to take off one’s clothes, strip (naked), undress, have no clothes 608 on; اساس كل عن عرى (asās) to be completely unfounded, be without any foundation II to disrobe, unclothe, undress
(ه s.o.); to bare, denude, lay bare, uncover (ه s.th.); to strip (ه ثيابه من s.o. of hill clothes); to deprive, divest, strip (من ه s.o. of s.th.)
عري ‘ūry nakedness, nudity; unsaddled (horse)
عرية ‘urya nakedness, nudity
عراء ‘arā’ nakedness, nudity; bareness; open space, open country │ العراء في in the open air, under the open sky, outside, outdoors; العراء في مسرح (masraḥ) open-air theater
عريان ‘uryān pl. عرايا ‘arāyā naked, nude, undressed, bare │ ملط عريان (malṭ)`stark-naked (eg.)
O عريانية ‘uryānīya nudism
المعاري al-ma‘ārī the uncovered parts of the body (hands, feet, face)
عار ‘ārin pl. عراة ‘urāh naked, nude, undressed, bare; free, devoid, destitute, bare, deprived, stripped, denuded (من or عن of s.th.); blank, bare (e.g., a room), stark (e.g., a narrative) │ األقدام عاري barefoot(ed), unshod
عز ‘azza i (‘izz, عزة ‘izza عزازة ‘azāza) to be or become strong, powerful, respected; to be or become rare, scarce, be scarcely to be found; to be or become dear, cherished, precious (على to s.o.); ان عليه عز he is sorry that ...; to be hard, difficult (على for s.o.); to hurt, pain (على s.o.), be painful (على for s.o.), be hard (على on s.o.) II to make strong. strengthen, reinforce, fortify, corroborate, confirm, solidify, invigorate, harden, advance, support (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to consolidate (ھ s.th,); to honor (ه s.o.); to raise in esteem, elevate, exalt (ه s.o.); to make dear, endear (ه s.o.) │ جانبه عزز to strengthen, reinforce, fortify, solidify, consolidate s.th., make s.th. strong, powerful, mighty IV to make strong, strengthen, fortify, reinforce, invigorate, harden, steel (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to love (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to honor (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to esteem, value, prize (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to make dear, endear (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) V to be or become strong, powerful, mighty, forceful, strengthened, fortified, reinforced, invigorated, hardened, solidified, consolidated; to be proud, boast
 (ب of), pride o.s., glory, exult (ب in) VIII to feel strong or powerful (ب due to, because of); to be proud, boast (ب of), pride o.s., glory, exult (ب in); to arrogate to o.s. (ب s.th.) X to overwhelm, overcome (على s.o.); to become powerful, mighty, respected, honored, be exalted; to make or hold dear, value highly, esteem (ه s.o.)
عز might, power, standing, weight; strength, force; honor. glory, high rank, fame, celebrity, renown │ عزھا Her Highness (title); شبابه عز في (šabābihī) in the prime of his youth
عزة ‘izza might, power, standing, weight; strength. force; honor, glory, high rank, fame, celebrity. renown; pride │ عزة الجانب power, might; القومية العزة (qaumīya) national pride; النفس عزة ‘i. an-nafs sense of honor, self-respect, self-esteem; صاحب العزة title of a bey
عزيز ‘azīz pl. اعزاء a‘izzā’ , اعزة a‘izza mighty, powerful, respected, distinguished, notable; strong; noble, esteemed, venerable, august; honorable; rare, scarce, scarcely to be found; difficult, hard (على for); precious, costly, valuable; dear, beloved (على to), cherished, valued (على by); friend; ruler, overlord │ عزيزي my dear! (esp. as a salutation in letters); الجانب عزيز mighty, powerful, strong 609
اعز a‘azz  mightier, more powerful; stronger; dearer, more beloved; العزى al-‘uzzā a goddess of the pagan Arabs
معزة ma‘azza esteem, regard, affection, love
تعزيز ta‘zīz pl. -āt strengthening, consolidation, support, backing
اعزاز i‘zāz strengthening, fortification, reinforcement, consolidation; love, affection, esteem, regard
اعتزاز i‘tizāz pride (ب in)
معتز mu‘tazz proud; mighty, powerful
عزب ‘azaba i u (عزوب ‘uzūb) to be far, be distant (عن from); to slip, escape (عن s.o.’s mind) │ األذھان عن عزب to be forgotten, sink into oblivion; -- ‘azaba u (عزبة ‘uzba, عزوبة ‘uzūba) to be single, unmarried
a‘zāb اعزاب ‘uzzāb, عزاب pl. ‘azab عزب
celibate, single, unmarried; bachelor
عزبة ‘izba pl. عزب ‘izab (eg.) country estate, farm; rural settlement
عزبة ‘uzba celibacy; bachelorhood عزوبة ‘uzūba celibacy; bachelorhood اعزب a‘zab  celibate, single, unmarried;
bachelor
معزب mu‘azzab sheik, emir (Nejd)
عزر ‘azara i (‘azr) to censure, rebuke, reprove, reprimand (ه s.o.); to refuse to have anything to do with s.o.; -- ‘azara i to curb, restrain, subdue (ه s.o.’s pride, and the like) II to censure, rebuke, reprove. reprimand (ه s.o.); to refuse to have anything to do with s.o.
عزر’azr censure, blame, rebuke, reproof, reprimand
تعزير ta‘zīr censure, blame, rebuke, reproof, reprimand; chastisement, castigation
اعتزار i‘tizār self-discipline
عزرائيل ‘izrā’īl  Azrael, the angel of death
عزف ‘azala i (‘af) to play (على on a musical instrument, ھ tunes); to play (ل to or for s.o.), make music (ل for s.o.); -- i u (‘azf, عزوف ‘uzūf) to turn away (عن from s.th.), become averse (عن to s.th.), avoid, shun ( عن s.th.), abstain, refrain (ان from doing s.th.)
عزوف ‘azūf disinclined, averse (عن to s.th.)
معزف mi‘zaf pl. معازف ma‘āzif  stringed instrument; O piano
عازف ‘āzif player, (musical) performer
معزوفة ma‘zūfa pl. -āt piece of music, performance, recital (on an instrument)
عزق ‘azaqa i (‘azq) to hoe, dig up, break up, loosen (األرض al-arḍa the soil)
معزقة mi‘zaqa pl. معازق ma‘āziq  hoe, mattock
عزل ‘azala i (‘azl) to remove, set aside, isolate, separate, segregate, detach, cut off (ه ھ، عن s.o., s.th. from); to depose (ه s.o.), release, dismiss, discharge (ه s.o. منصبه عن
 ‘an manṣibihī of his office) IV منصبه اعزل (manṣibahū) to give up one’s position, resign VII to be or become isolated, cut off, separated, segregated, detached (عن from) VIII to keep away, stand aloof, leave, withdraw; to retire, seclude o.s., segregate, secede, detach o.s., dissociate o.s., separate o.s., isolate o.s. (عن or ه ھ، from s.o., from s.th.), part (عن or ه ھ، with s.o., with s.th.); to be or get deposed │ الخدمة اعتزل (kidmata), العمل اعتزل (‘amala) to retire from service, from work, go into retirement
عزل ‘azl removal, dissociation, detachment, setting aside, isolation (also, e.g., in case of contagious disease), cutting-off, segregation, separation; deposition, discharge, dismissal │ حائط الحرق عزل (ḥarq) 610 fire wall; قابل غير للعزل irremovable, appointed for life tenure (judge)
عزل ‘azal unarmedness, defenselessness
عزل ‘uzul unarmed, defenseless
عزلة ‘uzla retirement, seclusion, retreat, privacy; segregation, reparation, detachedness; insulation, insularity, isolatedness; isolation; solitude │ عزلة في عن secluded, segregated, cut off, detached, separated, insulated, isolated from
عزلة ‘izla pl. عزل ‘izal subdistrict of a
nāḥiya (Yemen)
عزال ‘izāl (eg.) furniture, household effects, movable goods, luggage
اعزل a‘zal , f. عزالء ‘azlā’ , pl. عزل ‘uzl unarmed, defenseless │ األعزل السماك star α in the constellation Virgo, Spica Virginia (astron.)
معزل ma‘zil pl. معازل ma‘āzil  place of retirement, house of retreat; seclusion, segregation, isolation; isolation ward (in a hospital) │ عن بمعزل separated, detached, apart, secluded, segregated, isolated from
انعزال in‘izāl detachedness, seclusion, segregation, insularity, insulation; isolation
انعتزالية in‘izālīya isolationism
اعتزال i‘tizāl retirement, seclusion, retreat, privacy │ الخدمة اعتزال i‘tizāl al- kidma retirement from service
O عازل ‘āzil insulator (el.)
O عازلة ‘āzila pl. -āt, ‘awāzil  insulator, nonconductor (el.)
معزول ma‘zūl far, distant, remote (عن from); isolated, insulated
منعزل mun‘azil isolated, single, solitary, sporadic
المعتزلة al-mu‘tazila name of a theological school which introduced speculative dogmatism into Islam
معتزل mu‘tazal pl. -āt (place of) solitude, (place of) retirement
عزم ‘azama i (‘azm, عزيمة ‘azīma) to decide, resolve (على on s.th.); to make up one’s mind, determine, be determined, be resolved (على to do s.th.), be bent (على on s.th.); to adjure (على s.o.); to invite (ه s.o. ان or على to or to do s.th.) II to enchant, spellbind (على s.o., s.th., by magic rites) VIII to decide, resolve (على or ھ on s.th.), make up one’s mind, determine, be determined, be resolved (على or ھ to do s.th.), be bent (على or ھ on s.th.)
عزم ‘azm determination, firm will, firm intention, decision, resolution; energy
عزمة ‘azma decision, resolution; strict order (ب to do s.th.)
عزوم ‘azūm determined, resolved, resolute
عزومة ‘azūma invitation; banquet
عزيمة ‘azīma determination, firm will, firm intention; (pl. عزائم ‘azā’im ) resolution (على to do s.th.), decision; incantation; spell
عازم ‘āzim determined, resolved (على to do s.th.)
معتزم mu‘tazim determined, resolved (
على to do s.th.)
(عزو and عزا (عزي ‘azā u (‘azw) and عزى ‘azā i (‘azy) to trace (back) (ل or ھ الى s.th. to an origin), ascribe, attribute, impute, owe (ل or الى A s.th. to s.o., to s.th.); to charge, incriminate (ل or ھ الى with s.th. s.o. or s.th.), blame (ھ الى for
 s.th. s.o. or s.th.), lay the blame (ھ الى for s.th. on s.o., on s.th.); -- عزي ‘aziya a (عزاء ‘azā’) and عزا ‘azā u (عزاء ‘aza’) to take patience, console o.s. II to persuade (ه s.o.) to bear with equanimity (في or عن s.th., the death of s.o. or the loss of s.th.), comfort, console (ه عن s.o. over), 611 give comfort, express one’s sympathy, offer one’s condolences (ه to s.o.) V to take patience; to console o.s. (عن for) VII to console o.s. (ب with), find solace (ب in) VIII to trace (back) one’s descent (الى to)
عزو ‘azw tracing back, ascription, attribution; imputation, accusation
عزوة ‘izwa: العزوة حسن ḥasan al-‘i. of good ancestry, of good stock
عزاء ‘azā’ composure, equanimity; comfort, consolation, solace; ceremony of mourning
تعزية ta‘ziya pl. تعاز ta‘āzin consolation, solace, comfort; condolence │ تعزيته رفع to express one’s sympathy, offer one’s condolences; التعازي قدم (qaddama) do.
معز mu‘azzin comforter, consoler, condoler
عس ‘assa u (‘ass) to make the rounds by night, patrol by night
عسعس patrol (as a body of men)
عسس ‘asas guard │ المصونة العسة (maṣūna) (formerly:) the bodyguard of the Bey of Tunisia
عسيب ‘asīb tail bone (of the horse); (pl. عسب
‘usub) a palm branch stripped of its leaves
يعسوب ya‘sūb pl. يعاسيب ya‘āsīb  male bee, drone; notable, chief, leader
عوسج ‘ausaj boxthorn (Lycium europaeum
L. and Lycium arabicum Schwf.; bot.)
عسجد ‘asjad gold
عسجدي ‘asjadī golden
معسجد mu‘asjad gilded
عسر ‘asura u (‘usr, ‘usur) and ‘asira a (‘asar) to be difficult, hard, trying, adverse (على for s.o.); -- ‘asara i u (‘asr) to press, urge (ه على s.o. to); to force, compel, coerce (
ه على s.o. to) II to make difficult or hard (ھ s.th.); to act hostilely (على toward s.o.); to
oppress, distress (على s.o.), bear down hard (على on s.o.) III to treat (ه s.o.) roughly or harshly IV to be in distress, be in a fix, in a predicament; to become impoverished, be reduced to poverty, be up against it, be in financial straits, live in straitened circumstances V to be difficult, hard, trying, adverse (على for s.o.) VI = V; X = V; to find (ھ s.th.) difficult, hard, trying, or adverse
عسر ‘usr difficulty, trying or distressful situation, predicament, plight, fix, pinch, press, straits, straightened circumstances, distress, poverty, destitution
عسر ‘asir hard, difficult; trying, distressing, adverse
‘usr عسر = ‘usra عسر
عسير ‘asīr difficult, hard, harsh, rough; Asir (mountainous district in SW Arabia, between Hejaz and Yemen)
اعسر a‘sar  left-handed; harder, more difficult
‘usr عسر = ma‘sara معسرة
اعسار i‘sār poverty; financial straits, insolvency
تعسر ta‘assur difficulty
معسور ma‘sūr (living) in straitened circumstances
معسر mu‘sir (living) in straitened circumstances; poor, impoverished
متعسر muta‘assir hard, difficult, trying, distressing, adverse
عسعس ‘as‘asa to darken, grow dark
عسف ‘asafa i (‘asf) to act recklessly or thoughtlessly (في in s.th.), do (في s.th.) rashly; to treat unjustly, oppress, tyrannize (ه s.o.) II to overburden, 612 overtask, overtax (ه s.o.) IV = II; V to do (ھ s.th.) at random, haphazardly, dispose arbitrarily ( في of); to deviate, stray (عن from) VIII to do (ھ s.th.) at random, haphazardly; to deviate, stray (عن from); to go astray; to force, compel, coerce (ه ب s.o. to)
عسف ‘asūf injustice, oppression, tyranny
عسوف ‘asūf oppressor, despot, tyrant
 عساف ‘assāf oppressor, despot, tyrant
تعسف ta‘assuf arbitrariness; an arbitrary, liberal, inaccurate manner of using the language; aberration; deviation
تعسفي ta‘assufī arbitrary; despotic, tyrannical
اعتساف i‘tisāf straying, aberration, deviation; coercion, compulsion, force
عسقالن ‘asqalān  Ashkelon (seaport in SW Palestine)
عسكر ‘askar pl. عساكر ‘asākir  army, host, troops │ ضابطية عساكر (ḍābiṭīya) constabulary, police troops
عسكري ‘askarī military, army- (in compounds); pl. العسكريون the military; -- pl. عساكر ‘asākir ) soldier; private (mil.); policeman; pl. enlisted men, ranks
عسكرية ‘askarīya military service; militarism; soldiership, soldiery, soldierliness
معسكر mu‘askar pl. -āt military encampment, army camp; camp │ معسكر االعتقال concentration camp
عسل II to prepare or mix with honey (ھ s.th.); to sweeten, make sweet or pleasant (ھ s.th.)
عسل ‘asal pl. اعسال a‘sāl, عسول ‘usūl honey │ سكر عسل ‘a. sukkar molasses, treacle; اسود عسل do.; العسل شھر šahr al-‘a. honeymoon
عسلي ‘asalī honey-colored, amber, brownish
عسال ‘assāl gatherer of honey; beekeeper, apiculturist
عسالة ‘asāla beehive
عيسالن ‘aisalān hyacinth (bot.)
معسلة ma‘sala beehive
تعسيلة ta‘sīla (eg.) nap, doze
معسول ma‘sūl: prepared with honey; honeyed, honeysweet
معسل mu‘assal: معسل دخان (dukān) a mild-tasting tobacco, due to its preparation with molasses, glycerine, fragrant oils or essences
عسلج ‘usluj pl. عسالج ‘asālij  tender sprig, small twig, shoot
عسلوج ‘uslūj pl. عساليج ‘asālīj  tender sprig, small twig, shoot
 عسى ‘asā with foll. ان an and subjunctive: it might be, it could be
that ..., possibly ..., maybe ..., perhaps ... │ يكون ان عسى ما what might be ...?! عسى ماذا يكون ان what should I do! ھذا ينفع عسى ما (yanfa‘u) of what use could this possibly be! يقول عساه ماذا what could he possibly say?
عسي ‘asīy appropriate, proper, fitting (with personal construction) │ ب، عسى ھو ان) ب عسيون ھم) it befits him (them) to ... or that he (they) it is proper for him (for them) to or that he (they) …
 عاس ‘āsin dry, withered, wilted
عش II to build a nest, to nest; to take root, become established, settle in VIII to build a nest, to nest
a‘šāš, اعشاش ‘išāš, عشاش pl. ‘ušš عش
عششة ‘išaša nest
عش ‘ušša, ‘išša pl. عشش ‘ušaš, ‘išaš hut, shanty, shack, hovel; arbor, bower 613
عشب ‘ašiba a, ‘ašuba u to be grassy, grass- covered (ground) II do.
عشب ‘ušb (coll.: n. un. ة) pl. اعشاب a‘šāb (green) grass, herbage, plants; pasture
عشبة ‘ušba plant, herb
عشبي ‘ušbī herbaceous, herbal, vegetable, vegetal, plant- (in compounds)
herbarium مجموعة عشبية │
عشب ‘ašib grassy, abundant in grass عشابة ‘ašāba luxuriant vegetation معشب mu‘šib grassy, abundant in grass
عشتروت ‘aštarūt  Astarte
عشر ‘ašara u to collect the tithe (ه from s.o., ھ of s.th.) II = I; to divide into tenths III to be on intimate terms, associate (closely) (هwith s.o.) VI to be on intimate terms, associate with one another, live together
 عشر ‘ušr pl. اعشار a‘šār, عشور ‘ušūr one tenth, tenth part; tithe │ معشار عشر ‘u. mi‘sār one hundredth
عشري ‘arī decimal (adj.)
اعشاري a‘šārī decimal (adj.)
عشرة ‘išra (intimate) association, intimacy, companionship, relations, (social) intercourse, company; conjugal community, community of husband and wife
عشرة ‘ašara (f. عشر ‘ašar) ten: العشر the first ten days of Muharram
ثالث عشرة (f. ‘ašara talātata ثالثة عشر
talāta ‘ašrata) thirteen
عشرات ‘ašarāt some tens, tens (of); decades; (with foll. genit.) dozens of ..., scores of ...
عشار ‘išār (eg.) with young, pregnant (animal)
عشار ‘aššār collector of the tithe
عشير ‘ašīr pl. عشراء ‘ušarā’ companion, fellow, associate, friend, comrade
عشيرة ‘ašīra pl. عشائر ‘ašā’ir  clan, kinsfolk, closest relatives; tribe; pl. العشائر (syr.) the Bedouins │ العشائر حرس ḥaras al-‘a. Bedouin police (responsible for surveillance of the nomads)
عشائري ‘ašā’irī (syr.) Bedouin (adj.) │ العشائري العرف (‘urf) the customary law of the Bedouins
عاشوراء ‘āšūrā’ , عشوراء ‘ašārā’ , يوم عاشوراء yaum ‘ā., عاشوراء ليلة lailat ‘ā. Ashura, name of a voluntary fast day on the tenth day of Moharram; day of mourning sacred to the Shiites, the anniversary of Husain’s martyrdom at Kerbela (10  of Muharram A. H. 60)
عشرون ‘išrūn twenty
معشر ma‘šar pl. معاشر ma‘āšir  assemblage, community, company, society, group, troop; kinsfolk │ معشر يا الشباب yā ma‘šara š-šabāb oh ye young men!
معشار mi‘šāar one tenth, tenth part
معاشرة mu‘āšara (intimate) association, intimacy, social relations, social
intercourse; company, society, companionship; community, jointness
معاشر mu‘āšir companion, fellow, associate, friend, comrade
عشق ‘ašiqa a (‘išq) to love passionately (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), be passionately in love (ه ھ، with s.o., with s.th.) II to fit tightly together, interjoin closely, dovetail (ھ s.th.); to couple, connect (ھ s.th.: techn.) V to court, woo (ھا a woman), make love ( ھا to a woman)
عشق išq love, ardor of love, passion عشيق ‘ašīq lover, sweetheart (m.) عشيقة ‘ašīqa beloved, sweetheart (f.) عشيق ‘iššīq lover 614
تعشيق ta‘šīq tight interjunction, dovetailing; coupling (techn.)
عاشق ‘āšiq pl. عشاق ‘uššāq lover; fancier, fan, -phile (in compounds); -- (pl. عواشق ‘awāšiq ) knucklebone; (game of) knucklebones
معشوق ma‘šūq lover, sweetheart (m.)
معشوقة ma‘šūqa beloved, sweetheart (f.) (عشو and عشا (عشى ‘ašā u (‘ašw), and عشو
‘ašiya a (عشا ‘ašan) to be dim-sighted; to be night-blind II to make dim-sighted, make night-blind (ه s.o.); to give a dinner ( ه for s.o.) IV to make dim-sighted (ه s.o., ه the eyes) V to have dinner (or supper), to dine, to sup
عشا ‘ašan dim-sightedness; nightblindness, nyctalopia
عشى ‘ašīy evening
عشاء ‘asa’ pl. اعشية a‘šiya dinner, supper │ السري اعشاء (sirrī) the Lord’s supper, the Eucharist (Chr.)
عشاء ‘išā’ evening; (f.) evening prayer (Isl. Law)
عشوة ‘ašwa darkness, dark, gloom; dinner, supper
عشاوة ‘ašāwa dim-sightedness; night- blindness, nyctalopia
عشية ‘ašīya pl. -āt, عشايا ‘ašāyā (late) evening │ امس عشية ‘ašīyata amsi last night, yesterday in the evening; عشية بين
 وضحاھا (ḍuḥāhā) from one day to the other, overnight, all of a sudden
عشواء ‘ašwā’  darkness, dark, gloom; also see اعشى a‘šā
اعشى a‘šā, f. عشواء ‘ašwā’ dim-sighted; night-blind, nyctalopic; blind, aimless, haphazard, desultory, senseless │ خبط يخبط عشواء yakbiṭu kabṭa ‘ašwā’ he acts blindly, thoughtlessly, at random, haphazardly
عص aṣṣa a (‘aṣṣ, عصص ‘aṣaṣ) to be or become hard, harden
عصص ‘uṣaṣ, ‘uṣuṣ coccyx
عصب ‘aṣaba i (‘aṣb) to wind, fold, tie, bind, wrap (على ھ s.th. around or about s.th.); to bind up, bandage (ھ s.th.); to fold (ھ s.th.); to wrap (ھ the head) with a brow band, sash, or turban │ فاه الريق عصب (rīqu fāhu) the saliva dried in hill mouth, clogged his mouth II to wind around, fold around, tie around, wrap around (ھ s.th.); to bind up, bandage (ھ s.th.); to wrap (ھ the head) with a brow band, sash, or turban V to wind the turban round one’s head, put on the turban; to apply a bandage, bandage o.s.; to take sides, to side (ل مع، with; على against); to cling obdurately or fanatically (ل to); to be fanatic, bigoted, be a fanatic, a zealot; to form a league, clique, group, team, gang, or coalition, gang up, team up; to plot, conspire, collude, connive (على against) VIII to form a league, clique, group, team, gang, or coalition, gang up, team up; to go on strike, to strike
عصب ‘aṣab pl. اعصاب a‘ṣāb nerve; sinew
عصبي ‘aṣabī sinewy, nerved, nervy; nervous, neural, nerve-, neuro-, neur- (in compounds); nervous, high-strung │ المزاج عصبي nervous, high-strung; الجھاز العصبي (jahāz) the nervous system; حالة عصبية nervousness, nervosity; ~I الضعف العصبي (ḍu‘f) neurasthenia
عصبية ‘aṣabīya nervousness, nervosity;
-- (pl. -āt) zealous partisanship, bigotry, fanaticism; party spirit, team spirit, esprit de corps; tribal solidarity, racialism, clannishness, tribalism, national consciousness, nationalism
عصبة ‘aṣba pl. عصب ‘uṣab (eg.) a black headcloth with red or yellow border 615
عصبة pl. -āt and ‘uṣba pl. عصب ‘uṣab union, league, federation, association; group, troop, band, gang, clique; ‘aṣaba paternal relations, relationship, agnates │ األمم عصبة ‘uṣbat al-umam the League of Nations
عصيب ‘aṣib hot, crucial, critical (time, stage)
عصاب iṣāb band, ligature, dressing, bandage
عصابة ‘iṣāba pl. عصائب ‘aṣā’ib  band, ligature, dressing, bondage; headcloth, headband, fillet; brow band, frontlet; -- (pl. -āt) union, league, federation, association; group, troop, band, gang │ الخطف عصابات ‘i. al-kaṭf bands of robbers; العصابات حرب ḥarb al-‘i. guerilla war(fare)
تعصب ta‘aṣṣub fanaticism, ardent zeal, bigotry, fanatical enthusiasm; party spirit, partisanship; clannishness, racialism, race consciousness, tribalism
اعتصاب i‘tiṣāb pl. -āt strike
معصب muta‘aṣṣib fanatically enthusiastic (ل for); enthusiast, fanatic, bigot, zealot
عصيدة ‘aṣīda a thick paste made of flour and clarified butter
عصر ‘ṣara i (‘aṣr) to press (out), squeeze (out) (ھ s.th., e.g., grapes, olives, etc.); to wring (ھ s.th., esp. wet clothes); to compress (ھ s.th.) III to be a contemporary (ه of s.o.); to be contemporaneous, coeval, or concomitant (ھ with) V to be pressed (out), be squeezed (out) VII = V VIII to press (out), squeeze (out) (ھ s.th., e.g., grapes, olives, etc.) │ جبينه اعتصر (jabīnahū) to knit one’s brows (pensively)
عصر ‘aṣr (act of) pressing (out), squeezing (out); (act of) wringing (out); (pl. اعصر a‘ṣur, عصور ‘uṣūr, اعصار a‘ṣār) age, era, time; period; epoch; afternoon; (f.) afternoon prayer (Isl. Law) │ العصر الحجري (ḥajarī) the Stone Age; العصر الحاضر the present (time), our time; كل في ومصر عصر (wa-maṣrin) always and everywhere, at any time and any place
 عصرى ‘aṣrī modern, recent, present, actual, contemporary; (pl. -ūn) a contemporary
عصرية ‘aṣrīya modernism
عصير ‘asīr that which is pressed or squeezed out, (squeezed-out) juice, extract (also fig.); the best, the pick, the prime of s.th.
عصيرة ‘aṣīra (squeezed-out) juice
عصار ‘uṣār juice, sap
عصارة ‘uṣāra pl. -āt juice, sap (also
physiol.)
عصارة ‘aṣṣāra pl. -āt press, squeezer; oil press; cane press (also القصب عصارة ‘a. al-qaṣab); wringer
يوم عصاري ‘aṣāriya yaumin one afternoon
اعصار i‘ṣār pl. اعاصير a‘āṣīr  whirlwind, tornado, cyclone, hurricane │ O اإلعصار ضد ḍidd al-i. anticyclone
معصرة mi‘ṣara pl. معاصر ma‘āṣir  press, squeezer; oil press; cane press
معصري ma‘ṣarī (tun.) a brand of lamp
oil
معاصر mu‘āṣir contemporary, contemporaneous; a contemporary
عصعص ‘uṣ‘uṣ, ‘aṣ‘aṣ pl. عصاعص ‘aṣā‘iṣ
coccyx
عصف ‘aṣafa i (‘aṣf, عصوف ‘uṣūf) to storm, rage, blow violently (wind); به عصف to blow s.th. away, carry s.th. away (wind); to shake s.o. thoroughly, through and through
عصف ‘aṣf storming, blowing; stalk and leaves of grain 616
عصف ‘aṣfa (n. vic.) gust of wind, blast
عصافة ‘uṣafa chaff; straw
عاصف ‘āṣif blowing violently │ ريح عاصف (rīḥ) or عاصفة ريح violent wind, gale
عصف ‘āṣifa pl. عواصف ‘awāṣif violent wind, gale, tempest, storm, hurricane
  عصفر ‘uṣfur safflower (Carthamus tinctorius; bot.); the red dyestuff prepared from its flower heads
معصفر mu‘aṣfar dyed with ‘uṣfur
 عصفور ‘ufūr pl. عصافير ‘aṣāfīr  sparrow; any small bird │ الجنة عصفور ‘u. al-janna swallow; دوري عصفور (dūrī) house sparrow; مغن عصفور (mugannin) warbler; كناري عصفور (kanārī) canary; واحد) بحجر عصفورين (اصاب) ضرب) (aṣāba, ‘uṣfūrraini bi-ḥajarin) to kill two birds with one stone; على الف من خير اليد في عصفور الشجرة (kairun min alfin, šajara) a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush (proverb)
عصفورة ‘uṣfūra female sparrow; dowel, pin, peg
عصفورية ‘uṣfūrīya (syr.) insane asylum, madhouse
عصل ‘aṣala u (‘aṣl) to bend, twist, warp (ھ s.th.); -- ‘aṣila a (‘aṣl) to be twisted; to warp (wood)
عصم ‘aṣama i (‘aṣam) to hold back, restrain, curb, check, prevent, hinder (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to preserve, guard, safeguard, protect, defend (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to immunize, render immune (ه s.o., med.) VIII to cling, keep, adhere (ب to); to seek shelter or refuge (ب with, in), take refuge, resort (ب to) ; to keep up, maintain, guard, preserve (ب s.th., e.g., بالصمت bi-ṣ-ṣamt silence, الجأش برباط bi-r. il-ja’š equanimity) X = VIII; to resist (a temptation)
عصمة ‘iṣma hindering, hindrance, prevention, obviation; preservation, guarding, safeguarding; defense; protection; chastity, purity, modesty, virtuousness; impeccance, sinlessness, infallibility │ العصمة صاحبة title of ladies of high social standing; النكاح عصمة the bond of marriage; فالن عصمة في under s.o.’s custody, protection, or power; married to s.o.; يدھا في عصمتھا جعلت ja‘alat ‘iṣmatahā fī yadihā she made herself independent; she became or remained independent; زوجھا من عصمتھا فك fakka ‘iṣmatahā min zaujihā to revoke the husband’s matrimonial authority over his wife (jur.)
عصم a‘ṣima, اعصمة pl. ‘iṣām عصام
‘uṣum, عصام ‘iṣām strap, thong
عصامي ‘iṣāmī noble, eminent, distinguished (due to one’s own merits, as
 opposed to عظامي ‘iẓāmī); self-made; (pl.
-ūn) self-made man
عصامية ‘iṣāmīya self-made success
اعصم a‘ṣam , f. عصماء ‘aṣmā’ , pl. عصم ‘uṣm having a white foot (animal); excellent, valuable, precious │ من اندر األعصم الغراب (gurāb) rarer than a white- footed crow (proverbially of s.th. rare)
معصم mi‘ṣam pl. معاصم ma‘āṣim  wrist O معصم ma‘ṣam pl. معاصم ma‘āṣim 
traffic island, safety isle
اعتصام i‘tiṣām clinging, adherence (ب to), maintenance, preservation, guarding, safeguarding
عاصم ‘āṣim protector, guardian
‘awāṣim  عواصم pl. ‘āṣima عاصمة
capital city, metropolis
معصوم ma‘ṣūm inviolable, sacrosanct, protected by the laws of vendetta (Isl.
Law); infallible, sinless, impeccant, impeccable │ الزلل من معصوم (zalal) infallible
عصو) عصا) ‘aṣan (f.) pl. عصى ‘uṣīy, ‘iṣīy, اعص a‘ṣin staff, rod; wand; stick; 617 walking stick, cane; scepter, mace; (field marshal’s) baton │ المارشالية عصا ‘a. l-māršālīya field marshal’s baton; لعب العصا la‘b al-‘a. (eg. = تخطيب) singlestick fencing (a popular game, esp. in rural areas); العصا شق (šaqqa) to dissent, secede from the community; الطاعة عصا شق to rebel, revolt, renounce allegiance; عصا شق القوم (‘aṣā l-qaum) to sow dissension among the people; عصاھم انشقت (inšaqqat) they fell out (with one another), broke with one another
عصاة ‘aṣāh staff, rod; wand; stick
□ عصاية ‘aṣāya staff, rod; wand; stick; walking stick, cane
عصية ‘uṣayya little stick, little rod; O bacillus
عصى ‘aṣā i (‘aṣīy, معصية ma‘ṣiya, عصيان ‘iṣyān) to disobey, resist, oppose, defy (ھ ه s.o. in s.th.), refuse, or renounce, one’s obedience (ه ھ، to s.o. in s.th.), rebel, revolt (ه against s.o.) III = I; V to be or become difficult, intricate, or involved (affair) VI to be difficult, hard,
inaccessible, or impossible (على for s.o.); to refuse (عن to do s.th.) VIII = V X to resist, oppose, withstand, defy (على s.o., s.th.), revolt, rebel (على against s.o.); to be recalcitrant, insubordinate, rebellious; to be difficult, hard (على for s.o.); to be malignant, insidious, incurable (disease); to elude, escape, defy (عن s.th.), be beyond s.th. (عن); (of an instrument, machine, etc.) to fail, break down (على on s.o.), refuse to work (على for s.o.), fail to operate
عصى ‘aṣīy pl. -ūn, اعصياء a‘ṣiyā’  rebel; intractable, refractory, recalcitrant │ عصي النطق ‘aṣīy an-nuṭq unable to speak, incapable of speech
عصيان ‘iṣyān disobedience, insubordination, refractoriness; insurrection, revolt, rebellion, sedition
معصية ma‘ṣiya disobedience, insubordination, refractoriness; insurrection, sedition, revolt, rebellion; (pl. معاص ma‘āṣin) sin
استعصاء isti‘ṣā’ refractoriness, recalcitrance, obstinacy; impenetrability, unfathomableness; difficulty; malignancy, virulence, insidiousness; mechanical failure, breakdown, malfunction; jam, misfire (of a firearm)
عاص ‘āṣin pl. عصاة ‘uṣāh disobedient, insubordinate, rebellious, mutinous, riotous, seditious, subversive; rebel, insurgent; sinning, sinful
متعص muta‘āṣṣin difficult, intricate, implicated, involved, delicate; incurable, irremediable
مستعص musta‘ṣin difficult, intricate, implicated, involved, delicate; incurable, irremediable
عض ‘aḍḍa (1  pers. perf. ‘aḍiḍtu) a (‘aḍḍ, عضيض ‘aḍīḍ) to grab with the teeth, bite ( ب or على or ه ,ھ s.o., s.th.); to bite into s.th. (ھ); to hold on, cling, cleave (ب to); to torment (ه s.o., e.g., hunger) │ الزمان عضه (zamānu) or بنابه الدھر عضه ‘aḍḍahū d- dahru bi-nābihī time, or fate, gave him a raw deal, heaped trials and tribulations upon him, he suffered reverses II to bite fiercely or frequently (ه ,ھ s.o., s.th.)
 عض ‘iḍḍ small prickly shrubs, brambles
عضة ‘aḍḍa a bite
عضاض ‘aḍāḍ (given to) biting, snappish, mordacious
عضوض ‘aḍūḍ (given to) biting, snappish, mordacious
عضب ‘aḍb sharp, caustic, acid (tongue)
عضد ‘aḍada u (‘aḍd) to help, aid, assist, support, back (ه ,ھ s.o., s.th.), stand up (ه for s.o.), advocate (ھ s.th.) II and 618 III = I; VI to help, assist, or support one another, give mutual help, assistance, or support; to work hand in hand, cooperate
عضد ‘aḍud help, aid, assistance, support, backing; helper, aide, assistant, supporter, backer
عضد ‘aḍud (m. and f.) pl. اعضاد a‘ḍād upper arm; strength, power, vigor, force │ عضده شد (‘aḍudahū) to aid, assist s.o., stand by s.o.; المتين عضده ھو he is an indispensable aid to him
تعضيد ta‘ḍīd help, aid, assistance, support, backing
معاضدة mu‘āḍada help, aid, assistance, support, backing
تعاضد ta‘āḍud mutual aid, mutual assistance, cooperation
تعاضدي ta‘āḍudī cooperative (adj.)
معضد mu‘aḍḍid helper, aide, assistant, supporter, backer
عضل ‘aḍila a (‘aḍal) to be or become muscular; -- ‘aḍala IV (‘aḍl) to prevent (ھا a woman) from marrying IV to be or become difficult, problematic, puzzling, enigmatic, or mysterious (ب or ه for s.o.)
disease the (aṭibbā’) اعضل الداء األطباء │ the gave skill, medical all defied puzzling a posed headache, a physicians تعضل الداء األطباء V doctors the for problem = اعضل الداء األطباء
عضل ‘aḍil muscular, brawny
عضلة ‘aḍala pl. -āt, عضل ‘aḍal muscle
flexor عضلة قابضة extensor; عضلة باسطة │
عضلي ‘aḍalī muscle-, musculo-, muscul- (in compounds), muscular
عضال ‘uḍāl inveterate, chronic, incurable (disease)
معضل mu‘ḍil difficult, problematic, puzzling, enigmatic, mysterious
معضلة mu‘ḍila pl. -āt, معاضل ma‘āḍil  difficulty, problem, dilemma, puzzle, enigma
عضاه ‘iḍāh fair-sized thorny shrubs
عضو ‘uḍw pl. اعضاء a‘ḍā’ member, limb, organ (of the body); member (of an organization) │ اصلي عضو (aṣlī) regular member; التأنيث عضو pistil (bot.); عضو احتياطي (iḥtiyāṭī) substitute member, alternate member; التذكير عضو stamen (bot.); فخري عضو
اعضاء التناسل member; honorary (fakrī)
sexual the األعضاء الدقيقة and at-tanāsul a. (duwal) الدوا األعضاء genitals; the organs, ‘ilm علم وظائف األعضاء states; member the
w. al-a. physiology
عضوات ‘aḍawāt female members
غير or العضوي organic; ‘uḍwī عضوي (kutla) كتلة عضوية │ inorganic عضوي organism
عضوية ‘uḍwīya pl. -āt membership; organism
عطب ‘aṭiba a (‘aṭab) to perish, be destroyed, be ruined II to ruin, destroy, wreck, damage, injure, impair, mar, spoil ( ھ s.th.); to spice, mull (ھ s.th.); to brew, mix (ھ a drink) IV to ruin, destroy, wreck, damage, injure, impair, mar, spoil (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) V to be damaged VIII = I
عطب ‘aṭab perdition; wreck (e.g., of ships); destruction, ruin; damage, injury
تعطيب ta‘ṭīb damaging, ruin(ing), wreck, destruction
تعطب ta‘attub a suffering of damage, impairment, ruin
عطر II to perfume, scent (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) V to perfume o.s.
عطر ‘iṭr pl. عطور ‘uṭūr, عطورات ‘uṭūrāt perfume, scent; essence │ الورد عطر ‘i. al- ward attar of roses, rose oil 619
عطر ‘aṭir sweet-smelling, fragrant, aromatic │ عطرة سمعة (sum‘a) brilliant or excellent reputation
 عطري ‘iṭrī sweet-smelling, fragrant, aromatic
عطرية ‘iṭrīya pl. -āt aromatic, perfume, scent
عطار ‘aṭṭār perfumer, perfume vendor; druggist
عطارة ‘iṭāra drug business; perfumeries; drugs
عطار ‘aṭṭār sweet-smelling, fragrant, aromatic │ الثناء عاطر عليه اثنى atnā ‘alaihi ‘āṭira t-tanā’ to extol s.o. to the skies
معطر mu‘aṭṭar perfumed, scented
عطارد ‘uṭārid  (the planet) Mercury
عطس ‘aṭasa i u (‘aṭs, عطاس ‘uṭās) to sneeze II to cause (ه s.o.) to sneeze
عطسة ‘aṭsa (n. vic.) a sneeze عطس ‘uṭṭāš sneezing, sneezes عاطوس ‘āṭūs snuff (tobacco)
معطس ma‘ṭiš pl. معاطس ma‘āṭis  nose
عطش ‘aṭiša a (‘atāš) to be thirsty, to thirst; to long, languish, thirst (الى for) II to make thirsty, cause to thirst (ه ,ھ s.o., s.th.) IV = II; V to thirst, languish, long, yearn (الى for)
عطش ‘aṭaš thirst
عاطش ‘āṭiš thirsty; dry, parched (soil)
عطشان ‘aṭšān , f. عطشى ‘aṭšā pl. عطاش ‘iṭāš thirsty; covetous, desirous (الى of), languishing, yearning, craving (الى for)
عاطش ‘āṭiš thirsty; covetous, desirous ( الى of), languishing, yearning, craving (الى for)
متعطش muta‘aṭṭiš thirsty; covetous, desirous (الى of), languishing, yearning, craving (الى for)
عطشجي ‘aṭašjī pl. عطشجيات ‘aṭašjīya stoker, fireman
عطعط ‘aṭ‘aṭa to clamor, yell; to be uproarious, very noisy
عطف ‘at`tafa i (‘at`tf) to bend, incline, bow (ھ s.th.); to incline, lean (الى toward, to); to be favorably disposed (على toward s.o.), be attached (على to s.o.), harbor affection (على for), be fond (على of s.o.), have or feel compassion, sympathize (على
with s.o.), feel (على for s.o.); to turn away (عن from); به عطف to incline, dispose s.o. ( على toward), awaken affection or sympathy (على for) or interest (على in s.th.); على به عطف to make s.o. appreciate s.th., bring s.th. close to s.o.’s heart; عطف عن به to dissuade, alienate s.o. from II to fold, double, fold up (ھ s.th.); to make (ه s.o.) favorably disposed; to soften s.o.’s (ه) heart, move s.o.; to awaken affection, sympathy, tenderness (ه in s.o., على for); to fill with affection, love, etc. (ه s.o., ھ s.o.’s heart, على or نحو for) V to be favorably disposed (على toward s.o.), be attached (على to s.o.), be fond (على of s.o.), have or feel compassion, sympathize (على with s.o.), feel (على for s.o.); to deign (ب to do s.th.) │ بالعطاف تعطف to put on a coat, wrap o.s. in a coat or cloak VI to harbor mutual affection, be attached to one another VII to be bent, inclined, crooked, or curved; to bend, curve; to bow, make a bow; to turn off (الى toward, to), turn, swing (الى into a road, etc.); to be favorably disposed (على الى، toward), be attached (على الى، to), be fond (على الى، of), have or feel compassion, sympathize (الى، على with), feel (على الى، for s.o.); to turn away, turn around VIII = بالعطاف اعتطف بالعطاف تعطف X to ask for, or seek, s.o.’s (ه) compassion or sympathy; to entreat, beseech, implore (ه s.o.); to affect winning or conciliatory manners, display affection; to seek to conciliate, propitiate, or 620 win over (خاطره kāṭirahū or ه s.o.); to seek to be friends (ه with s.o.); to try to attract or win (ھ s.th.)
عطف ‘aṭf bond(ing), inclination, curving, curvature; corner; sympathy (على with), affection, attachment, liking (على for) │ العطف (حرف) اداة adāt (ḥarf) al-‘a. conjunction (gram.); البيان عطف ‘a. al- bayān explicative apposition (gram.)
عطف ‘iṭf pl. اعطاف a‘ṭāf side (of the body) │ األعطاف لين layyin al-a. tractable, docile, pliant; األعطاف ترنحت (tarannaḥat) they were carried away, became ecstatic; أعطافه بين ضم to combine, encompass, comprise s.th.
عطفة ‘aṭfa turn, turning, twist, curve, bend; (pl. -āt, عطف ‘uṭaf) blind alley, dead and (eg.)
 a‘ṭifa اعطفة ‘uṭuf, عطف pl. ‘iṭāf عطاف
coat, cloak
عطوف ‘aṭūf compassionate, sympathetic, affectionate, loving, tender, kind
عطوفة ‘uṭūfa affection, attachment, benevolence, good will; (as an honorific title before the name = العطوفة صاحب His Grace
معطف mi‘ṭaf pl. معاطف ma‘āṭif  coat, overcoat; smock, frock │ مشمع معطف (mušamma‘) (impregnated) raincoat; معطف فرو m. farw fur coat
انعطاف in‘iṭāf inclination, bind(ing), curving, curvature; sympathy, compassion; liking, attachment, affection
استعطاف isti‘ṭāf imploring, entreaty, earnest supplication; tender affection; conciliatory attitude
عاطف ‘āṭif compassionate, sympathetic, affectionate, loving, tender, kind │ حرف عاطف (ḥarf) conjunction (gram.)
عاطفة ‘āṭifa pl. عواطف ‘awāṭif  amorous affection; affectionate benevolence, solicitude, sympathy, compassion, affection, attachment, liking, kind(li)ness; feeling, sentiment
عاطفي ‘āṭifī sentimental; emotional; emotive, feeling; tender, affectionate, loving
عاطفية ‘āṭifīya sentimentality; emotionalism, emotionality
منعطف mun‘aṭaf pl. -āt (road) turn, curve; turn, turning, winding, tortuosity, twist, bend; lane, alley, narrow street
عطف musta‘ṭaf imploring, beseeching, supplicatory; tender, affectionate
عطل ‘aṭala a (‘aṭal) to he destitute, he devoid (من of s.th.), lack (من s.th.); to be idle, not to work, rest; to he without work, he unemployed II to leave without care, to neglect (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to leave without work, leave idle (ه ھ s.o. s.th.); to hinder, hamper, impede, obstruct (ھ s.th.); to interrupt, suspend, defer, discontinue, stop (ھ s.th., esp. some activity); to ban temporarily, suspend (ھ s.th., esp. publication of a newspaper); to damage
(gravely), destroy, ruin, wreck, paralyze, neutralize, put out of service or commission, lay up; put out of action, make inoperative (ھ s.th.); to stop, shut off (ھ s.th., e.g., a motor); to shut down, keep closed (ھ s.th., e.g., an office) V to remain without work or employment; to he or become unemployed (also عن تعطل العمل); to be or become idle, inactive; to be hindered, hampered, impeded, obstructed, delayed, suspended, deferred, or interrupted; to stop, stall (motor, machine); to fail (apparatus); to he (gravely) damaged. be or be put out of action or commission; to be shut down, be or remain closed; to he no longer valid, be ineffective (statutes)
عطل ‘uṭl destitute, devoid (من of s.th.); impairedness, defectiveness, (gravely) damaged state; damage, loss 621
عطل ‘aṭal unemployment
عطلة ‘uṭla unemployment, also عن عطلة الشغل (šugl); leisure, holidays, vacation(s), recess; (pl. -āt, عطل ‘uṭal) holiday, off day, free day │ رسمية عطلة (rasmīya) official, or legal, holiday; الرسمية العطالت ايام (ayyām al-‘u.) official, or legal, holidays; األسبوع عطلة ‘u. al-usbū‘ weekend; عطلة قضائية (qaḍā’īya) court recess (jur.); عطلة األسبوع نھاية ‘u. nihāyat al-usbū‘ weekend
عطالة ‘aṭāla unemployment
تعطيل ta‘ṭīl hindering, obstruction, hampering; discontinuance, interruption, deferment, suspension (of some activity); temporary ban, suspension (of a newspaper); impairment, damaging, destruction, ruining, wrecking, injury; paralyzation, neutralization, stoppage (e.g., of traffic); stopping, shutting-off (of a motor); shutdown, closure (of an office); a theological concept denying God all attributes (as opposed to tašbīš; theol.) │ المرور حركة تعطيل t. ḥarakat al-murūr traffic congestion
تعطل ta‘aṭṭul unemployment; inactivity, idleness; (mechanical) failure, breakdown; standstill │ العمل عن تعطل (‘amal) unemployment
عاطل ‘āṭil destitute, devoid (من of s.th.); inactive. idle, out of work, jobless,
 unemployed; an unemployed person; useless │ عاطل عضو (‘uḍw) functionless organ (biol.)
عواطل ‘awāṭil  vacations, holidays
معطل mu‘aṭṭil one who denies God all attributes (theol.)
معطل mu‘ṭṭal inactive, idle, out of work, jobless, unemployed; inoperative, out of action, service, or commission, shut- down; stopped, shut-off (motor); closed (office)
عطن ‘aṭan i u (‘aṭn) to soak (الجلد al- jilda the skin or hide so as to remove the hair, in tanning); to macerate (الكتان al- kattāna the flax); -- ‘aṭina a (‘aṭan) to rot, decay, putrefy (skin, hide, in tanning) II =
I	‘aṭana
عطن ‘aṭan resting place of camels near a waterhole │ العطن ضيق ḍayyiq al-‘a. narrow-minded, parochial; العطن رحب raḥb al-‘a. broad-minded
عطن ‘aṭin putrid, rotten, stinking عطين ‘aṭīn putrid, rotten, stinking عطان ‘iṭān tanbark
عطو III to give (ه ھ to s.o. s.th.) IV to give (ھ ل or ه to s.o. s.th.); to present, hand over, offer (ه ھ to s.o. s.th.); to grant, award, accord (ه ھ to s.o. s.th.); to present (ه ھ
s.o. with s.th.), bestow (ه ھ upon s.o. s.th.); pass. u‘ṭiya to get, obtain, receive ( ھ s.th.) │ دروسا اعطى to give lessons; اعطى اقواله (aqwālahū) to give evidence, give one’s testimony (jur.); الكلمة له اعطى (kalimata) to allow s.o. to speak; بيده اعطاه (bi-yadihī) to surrender or submit to s.o. V to ask for charity, ask for alms (ه s.o.); to beg VI to take (ھ s.th.); to swallow, take ( ھ a medicine); to take over, assume, undertake, take upon o.s. (ھ a task); to occupy o.s., be occupied or buoy (ھ with s.th.), be engaged (ھ in s.th.), pursue, practice (ھ an activity) X = V
عطا ‘aṭan gift, present
عطاء ‘aṭā’ pl. a‘tiys gift, present; (pl.
-āt) offer, tender │ عطاء قدم (qaddama) to make an offer or tender
عطية ‘aṭīya pl. عطايا ‘aṭāyā gift, present
معاطاة mu‘āṭāh exercise, practice, pursuit (of an activity)
اعطاء i‘ṭā’ donation; presentation, grant(ing), award(ing)
تعاط ta‘āṭin pursuit, practice (of an activity) 622
استعطاء isti‘ṭā’ begging, mendicity
معط mu‘ṭin giver, donor
معطى mu‘ṭan given; (pl. -āt) given quantity (math.)
مستعط musta‘ṭin beggar
عظل III الكالم عاظل (kalāma) to be repetitious in one’s speech, use tautologisms, repeat o.s. in speaking
عظم ‘aẓuma u (‘iẓam, عظامة ‘aẓāma) to be or become great, big, large, grand, grandiose, magnificent, imposing, powerful, or mighty; to be huge, vast, enormous, tremendous, immense, stupendous; to be hard, distressing, painful, agonizing, or oppressive (على for s.o.) II to make, or cause to become, great(er), big(ger), large(r), (more) grandiose, (more) imposing, (more) magnificent, mighty or mightier, (more) powerful (ه ھ، s.o. s.th.), enhance the greatness, grandeur, magnificence, power, or might (ه ھ، of s.o., of s.th.); to enlarge, enhance, magnify (ھ s.th.); to aggrandize, glorify, extol, exalt (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) IV = II; to attach great importance (ھ to s.th.); to regard (ھ s.th.) as huge, vast, tremendous, enormous, immense, or stupendous; to find (ھ s.th.) hard, distressing, or oppressive V to be proud (ب of s.th.); to boast (ب of), vaunt, flaunt (ب s.th.); to he arrogant, presumptuous, haughty VI to be proud, arrogant, presumptuous, haughty, supercilious; to be great, grand, grandiose, imposing, huge, prodigious; to equal in weight, significance or importance (ھ s.th.); to be weighty, grave, serious, portentous (ه for s.o.) │ العدو شأن يتعاظمه ال (ša’nu l-‘adūw) the enemy’s importance does not unduly impress him X to be proud, arrogant, presumptuous, haughty, supercilious; to regard as great, significant, or important (ھ s.th.)
 ‘iẓām عظام a‘ẓum, اعظم pl. ‘aẓm عظم مسحوق العظام shinbone; عظم الساق │ bone of softening al-‘i. līn لين العظام meal; bone osteomalacia bones, the
عظمي ‘aẓmī bone-, osteo- (in compounds) osseous, bony
عظم ‘iẓam, ‘uẓm greatness, magnitude, grandeur, power, might; significance, importance
عظمة ‘aẓma piece of bone; bone
عظمة ‘aẓama majesty; pride, arrogance, haughtiness; exaltedness, sublimity, augustness │ العظمة صاحب His Majesty; His Highness; السلطان عظمة ‘a. as-sulṭān His Highness, the Sultan
عظموت ‘aẓamūt greatness, magnitude, grandeur, power, might
عظيم ‘aẓīm pl. عظماء ‘uẓamā’ , عظام ‘iẓām, عظائم ‘aẓā’im  great, big, large; strong, powerful, mighty; significant, important; grand, grandiose, imposing, stately, magnificent; lofty, exalted, august, sublime, splendid, gorgeous, glorious, superb; huge, vast, prodigious, enormous, tremendous, immense, stupendous; hard, distressing, gruesome, trying, oppressive
opportunity; golden (furṣa) فرصة عظيمة │ العظماء things; terrible or great عظائم األمور world the of great the (kubarā’) والكبراء
عظيمة ‘aẓīma pl. عظائم ‘aẓā’im  a prodigious, terrible thing; great misfortune, calamity, disaster
عظامي ‘iẓāmī of noble descent, highborn, aristocratic, noble, blue- blooded, of or pertaining to nobility; aristocrat, nobleman
اعظم a‘ẓam , f. عظمى ‘uẓmā, pl. اعاظم a‘āẓim  greater, bigger; mare significant, more important; greatest, major, supreme; most significant, paramount │ رجال اعاظم مصر a. r. miṣr the most outstanding men 623 of Cairo; عظمى جريمة capital crime; العظمى الحرب (ḥarb) World War I; السواد األعظم (sawād) the great mass, the great majority, the major portion (of the people); األعظم الصدر (ṣadr) (formerly:) title of the Grand Vizier of the Ottoman Empire (Ott.-Turk.: ṣadr-i a‘ẓam)
تعظيم ta‘ẓīm aggrandizement, glorification, exaltation; military salute
معظم mu‘aẓẓam glorified, exalted, revered, venerated; sublime, august (esp. of rulers); splendid, gorgeous, glorious, magnificent, resplendent; bony; ossified
معظم mu‘aẓza□m most of (them), the majority, major part or portion (of), main part; maximum │ معظمه في mostly, for the moot part, largely
متعاظم muta‘āẓim proud, arrogant, presumptuous, haughty, supercilious
وعظ see ‘iẓa عظة
عف ‘affa i (عفة ‘iffa, عفاف ‘afāf) to refrain, abstain (عن from s.th. forbidden or indecent); to be abstinent, continent, virtuous, chaste, modest, decent, pure V = I; to shrink (عن from), be shy (عن of), be ashamed
عف ‘aff chute, modest, virtuous, pure; decent; honest, upright, righteous
عفة ‘iffa abstinence, continence, virtuousness, virtue, chastity, decency; purity; modesty; integrity, probity, honesty, uprightness, righteousness
‘iffa عفة = ‘afāf عفاف
عفيف ‘afīf pl. اعفاء a‘fā’ , اعفة a‘iffa chaste, modest, virtuous, pure; decent; honest, upright, righteous
اعف a‘aff  chaster, more virtuous; more decent, of greater integrity
تعفف ta‘affuf abstinence, continence, chastity, modesty; restraint
متعفف muta‘affif chute, modest, virtuous, pure; decent; honest, upright righteous
عفر ‘afara i (‘afr) to cover with dust, to soil, begrime (also بالتراب bi-t-turāb; ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) II = I; to dust, sprinkle with dust or powder (ھ s.th.); to glean
عفر ‘afar pl. اعفار a‘far dust
عفر ‘ufār (eg.) duet
O عفارة ‘afāra pl. -āt spray, atomizer
اعفر a‘far , f. عفراء ‘afrā’  dust-colored, earth-colored
 ya‘āfīr  يعافير pl. ya‘fūr يعفور
earthcolored gazelle
تعفير ta‘fīr (act of) dusting, sprinkling with dust or powder
عفرت II ta‘frata to behave like a demon or devil
عفريت ‘ifrīt pl. ‘afārīt  malicious, mischievous; sly, cunning, crafty, wily; afreet, demon, imp, devil; (eg.) naughty child │ عفريت ولد (walad) mischievous child, good-for-nothing, ne’er-do-well (eg.)
عفريتة ‘afrīta (lifting) jack (eg.)
عفرتة ‘afrata devilry; dirty trick
عفارم ‘afārim (eg.) bravo! well done!
عفش’afaša i (‘afš) to gather, collect, heap up, amass (ھ s.th.)
عفش ‘afš refuse, rubbish, trash, junk; luggage, baggage; household effects,
furniture
worthless عفاشة من الناس ‘afāša: عفاشة people
عفص ‘afṣ, galls, gallnuts, oak apples
عفص ‘afṣ sharp, pungent, acrid, astringent and bitter (of taste)
عفوصة ‘ufūṣa sharpness, pungency, acridity, astringence (of taste) 624
عفن ‘afina a (‘afan, عفونة ‘ufūna) to rot, decay, putrefy, spoil; to be rotten, decayed, putrid spoiled; to be or become moldy, musty, mildewy, decomposed V = I
عفن ‘afan rottenness, putridity, decay, spoiledness
عفن ‘afin rotten, putrid, decayed, decomposed, spoiled, moldy, musty, mildewy; septic │ العفنة الحمى (ḥummā) putrid fever
عفونة ‘ufūna rottenness, putridity, decay, spoiledness
تعفن ta‘affun rottenness, putridity, decay, spoiledness
معفن mu‘affan rotten, putrid, decayed, decomposed, spoiled, moldy, musty mildewy; septic
متعفن muta‘affin rotten, putrid, decayed, decomposed, spoiled, moldy, musty, mildewy; septic
عفو) عفا) ‘afā u (‘afw, عفاء ‘afā) to be or become effaced, obliterated, wiped out, eliminated; -- ‘afā u (‘afw) to efface, obliterate, wipe out, eliminate (عن or ھ s.th.); to forgive (عن s.o.); to excuse, free, relieve, exempt (ل عن s.o. from s.th.); to desist, abstain, refrain (عن from) II to efface, obliterate, wipe out, eliminate (على or ھ s.th.) III and IV to restore to health, heal, cure (ه s.o.); to guard (عن or ه من s.o. against), protect, save (عن or ه من s.o. from); to free, release, relieve, exempt, except (ه ھ، s.o., s.th. عن or من from), excuse, dispense (عن or ه من s.o. from s.th.) IV to dismiss, discharge, fire, depose (ه s.o.) VI to recuperate, recover, regain health VIII to call on s.o. (ه) in order to obtain s.th. X to ask s.o.’s (ه) pardon, ask for a reprieve (ه s.o.); to request (ه of s.o.) exemption (من from s.th.); to tender one’s resignation (من from an office); to resign ( من from an office)
عفو ‘afw effacement, obliteration, elimination; pardon, forgiveness; waiver of punishment (Isl. Law); amnesty (عن for); boon, kindness, favor; surplus; عفوا ‘afwan I beg your pardon! excuse me! (in reply to “thank you”) you’re welcome! don’t mention it!; of one’s own accord, by o.s., spontaneously; casually; without design, in passing, incidentally I
(عام عفو (شامل (‘āmm) amnesty (عن for); العقوبة عن العفو حق (ḥaqq al-‘a., ‘uqūba) right of granting pardon (jur.); الخاطر عفو ‘afwa l-kāṭir spontaneously, unhesitatingly, casually
عفو ‘afw pl. عفاء ‘afā’ young donkey
عفوي ‘afwī spontaneous
عفي ‘afīy (eg.) strong, vigorous, husky, robust
عفاء ‘afā’ effacement, obliteration, extinction, ruin, fall; dust │ العفاء ادركه adrakahū l-‘afā’u to fall into disuse, pass out of use; العفاء عليه it’s all over with him, he is done for
معافاة muāfāh exemption, excuse, dispensation
 اعفاء i‘fā’ exemption (from a fee, and the like), excuse, dispensation; remission (of punishment); discharge, dismissal (from an office)
استعفاء isti‘fā’ request for pardon; excuse, apology; resignation (من from an office)
عاف ‘āfin effaced, obliterated, wiped out, eliminated
عافية ‘āfiya (good) health, well-being; vigor, vitality
معافى mu‘āfan exempt(ed), free, excused, dispensed (من from); healthy
عق ‘aqqa u (‘aqq) to cleave, split, rip, rend (ھ s.th.); -- ‘aqqa u (عقوق ‘uqūq) to be disobedient, disrespectful, undutiful, 625 refractory, recalcitrant (اباه abāhu or والده wālidahū toward his father, of a child)
عق ‘aqq disobedient, disrespectful, undutiful, refractory, recalcitrant (child)
عقيق ‘aqīq (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. عقائق ‘aqā’iq  carnelian; (pl. اعقة a‘iqqa) canyon, gorge, ravine
عقيقي ‘aqīqī carnelian-red
عقوق ‘uqūq disobedience, unruliness, refractoriness, recalcitrance (of a child)
اعق a‘aqq  more irreverent, more disrespectful, naughtier │ اعقك ما (a‘aqqaka) how irreverent you are!
عاق ‘āqq disobedient, disrespectful, undutiful, refractory, recalcitrant (child)
عقب ‘aqaba u (‘aqb) to follow (ه ھ، s.o., s.th. or after s.o., after s.th.), succeed (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to come after, ensue; to continue II to follow (ه ھ، s.o., s.th. or after s.o., after s.th.), succeed (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to pursue, follow, trail (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to expose, compromise, show up (على s.o.); to revise, correct, rectify, amend; to review critically, criticize (على s.th.), comment ( على on s.th.) │ آثاره عقب to tread in s.o.’s footsteps III to alternate, take turns (ه with s.o.); to punish (على or ه ب s.o. for) IV to follow (ه ھ s.o., s.th. or after s.o., after s.th.), succeed (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to come after, ensue; to have for son (ه s.o.), be the father (ه of a son); to have as offspring, have sired (ه s.o.); to revert from evil to
good, mend one’s ways, reform; to end well, succeed, V to pursue, follow, trail ( ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) VI to be successive or consecutive, succeed one another, follow
one after the other; to dart one by one (على upon), launch successive attacks, act successively, embark successively (على upon)
عقب ‘aqib, ‘aqb pl. اعقاب a‘qāb heal; last part of s.th., end; that which follows subsequently or ensues, subsequence (with foll. genit.); grandson; offspring, progeny; ‘aqiba (prep.) immediately after, subsequent to │ عقبه جاء (‘aqibahū) or جاء عقبه في جاء ,بعقبه he came closely after him; عقب على ‘alā ‘aqibi immediately after ...; عقبيه على (عاد) رجع (‘aqibaihi) pl. رجعوا اعقابھم على (عادوا) to retrace one’s steps, turn back; عقبيه على رده (raddahū) pl. ردھم اعقابھم على to drive s.o. back to where he came from; عقبيه على ارتد (irtadda) pl. ارتدوا اعقابھم على to withdraw, retreat; على رأسا عقب (ra’san) head over heels, topsy-turvy, upside down; from the ground up, radically; عقب على ظھرا (ẓahran) do.; في الشھر اعقاب (a. iš-šahr) at the end of the month; الصلوات اعقاب a. aṣ-ṣalawāt (supererogatory) prayers performed after the prescribed salat; الليلة اعقاب في at daybreak, immediately after night was over
عقب ‘uqb pl. اعقاب a‘qāb end, outcome, upshot; issue, effect, result, consequence; rest, remnant, remainder; (cigarette, etc.) end, butt, stub (of a pencil, of a candle, of a check, etc.); counterfoil
عقب ‘aqaba pl. عقاب ‘iqāb steep road or track, steep incline; pass, mountain road; العقبة or العقبة قلعة qal‘at al-‘a. ھqaba (seaport in SW Jordan): (pl. -āt, عقاب ‘iqāb) obstacle; difficulty │ دون عقبة وقف (‘aqabatan) to stand in the way of s.th., obstruct s.th.
عقيب ‘aqīb one who, or that which, succeeds or is subsequent; following, subsequent │ ذلك عقيب (‘aqība) thereafter, afterwards, subsequently
عقاب ‘uqāb (usually f.) pl. اعقب a‘qub,
(astron.) quilaالعقاب ھ eagle; ‘iqbān عقبان
عقابي ‘uqābī eagle, (in compounds), aquiline
 عقيب ‘uqayyib a small eagle, Eaglet 626
عقوبة ‘uqūba pl. -āt punishment, penalty; pl. punitive measures, sanctions
economic (iqtiṣādīya) عقوبات اقتصادية │ code penal قانون العقوبات sanctions;
عقوبي ‘uqūbī penal, punitive
عقبى ‘uqbā end, outcome, upshot; issue, effect, result, consequence
يعقوب ya‘qūb  Jacob, James; ya‘qūb (pl. يعاقيب ya‘āqīb ) male mountain quail (zool.) │ يعقوب نفس في لحاجة li-hājatin fī nafsi y. for some unknown reason, from secret motives
يعقوبي ya‘qūbī pl. يعاقبة ya‘āqiba a Jacobite, an adherent of Jacob Baradai; Jacobite (adj.; Chr.)
تعقيب ta‘qīb pl. -āt pursuit, chase; investigation; comment(ing); appeal (of a sentence, jur.) │ التعقيب دائرة court of review, appellate court (Tun.)
معاقبة mu‘āqaba infliction of punishment, punishment; pl. معاقبات sanctions (pol.)
عقاب ‘iqāb infliction of punishment, punishment; penalty
عقابي ‘iqābī penal, punitive
تعقب ta‘aqqub pl. -āt pursuit, chase; investigation
على تعاقب │ succession ta‘āqub تعاقب centuries of course the in العصور
successively على العاقب ‘āqib: عاقب
عاقبة aqiba pl. عواقب ‘awāqib  end, outcome, upshot; issue, effect, result, consequence │ العاقبة سليم benign (disease)
معاقب mu‘āqib alternate; punisher
متعاقب muta‘āqib successive, consecutive, uninterrupted, continuous
عقد ‘aqada i (‘aqd) to knit, knot, tie (ھ s.th.) to fasten with a knot (ھ s.th.); to put together, join, fold, lock (ھ one’s hands, and the like); to contract (ھ the brows, and the like); to fix (ھ one’s eyes, ب on); to arch, vault (ھ a structure); to hold, convene, convoke, summon, call (ھ s.th., e.g., a session, a meeting); to conclude (ھ a contract), effect (ھ a transaction, a sale);
to contract (ھ a loan) │ على امال عقد ‘aqada amalan) to pin, or set, one’s hope(s) on ...; جبھته عقد (jabhatahū) to knit, or wrinkle, one’s brows, frown; محادثة عقد (muḥādatatan) to strike up a conversation; على خطبتھا عقد (‘uqida kiṭbatuhā) she became engaged to; (الخناصر) الخنصر عقد على (kinṣir, kanāṣir) to give s.th. top- rating because of its excellence, put s.th. above everything else; زواجا عقد (zawājan) to contract a marriage; على (العزيمة) العزم عقد (‘azma) to make up one’s mind to do s.th., be (firmly) determined to do s.th.; لسانه عقد to silence s.o.; الشيء لواء عقد to found, start, originate, launch, produce, kindle, provoke s.th.; القيادة لواء لھا المعقود السفينة (liwā’u l-q.) the flagship; المعقود البارحة لالميرال لواؤھا (liwā’uhā li-l-amīrāl) the admiral’s flagship; ناصيته عقد (nāṣiyatahū)
= نطاقا عقد جبھته؛ عقد (niṭāqan) to form a cordon (حوله around s.o.); على النية عقد (nīyata) to resolve, make up one’s mind to do s.th., decide on s.th.; المجد لواء له عقد النصر)) ‘uqida lahū liwā’u l-majd (n-naṣr) approx.: he was awarded the laurel of fame (of victory); المرأة على عقد (‘alā l- mar’a) to marry a woman II to knit (tightly), knot, tie (ھ s.th.); to pile up, mass together (ھ e.g., clouds), cluster (ھ e.g., vapors, steam); to complicate, make difficult, intricate, or tangled ھ (s.th.) II and IV to congeal, coagulate, clot, thicken, inspissate (ھ s.th., esp. by boiling) V to be knit (together), knotted, tied with knots; to be or become intricate or complicated; to congeal, coagulate, clot, thicken; to gather (of clouds, 627 etc.) │ لسانه تعقد (lisānuhū) to express o.s. with difficulty, speak laboringly; to be unable to speak, be tongue-tied VI to be interknit, interknotted, interjoined, interlinked; to make a contract; to reach agreement, come to mutual agreement ( على on, about) VII to be knit (together), knotted, tied with knots, entangled; to contract, become contracted (e.g., brows); to be inhibited (tongue); to congeal, coagulate, clot, thicken; to be concluded (contract), be effected (sale); to convene, assemble, meet (a committee, a conference, and the like) │ على منعقد االجماع ان (ijmā‘) there is general conviction
to tamar) (zahr, لم ينعقد له زھر وال ثمر ...; that
 remain without blossom and fruit, be without any effect and consequence VIII to believe (firmly) (s.th., ب in)
عقد ‘aqd knitting, knotting, tying; joining, junction, looking; holding, summoning, convocation (of a session, of a meeting); conclusion (of a contract, of a sale); contraction (of a loan, and the like);
-- (pl. عقود ‘uqūd) contract, agreement, arrangement; legal act, legal transaction; document, deed; vault, arah; group of ten, half-score; decade, decennium │ الفي عقد (alfī) millennium; الزواج عقد ‘a. az-zawāj contraction of marriage, marriage; marriage certificate; القران عقد contraction of marriage, marriage; الملكية عقد ‘a. al- milkīya title deed; عقدھم انفرط (infaraṭa) they broke up, they went their own ways
عقد ‘iqd pl. عقود ‘uqūd chaplet, necklace
│ العقد واسطة center, focus, highlight, chief attraction, pièce de résistance
عقدة ‘uqda pl. عقد ‘uqad knot (also = nautical mile); inch; joint (anat.); splice; knot, knur, knob, swelling, nodule, node, protuberance, excrescence, outgrowth; compact, covenant, contract; problem, difficulty; puzzle, riddle; complex (psychol.)
عقاد ‘aqqād a producer and seller of cords, braiding and tassels, maker of trimmings
عقادة ‘iqāda manufacture of trimmings, braiding, etc.
عقيد ‘aqīd pl. عقداء ‘uqadā’  contracting party, contractant, contractor; a military rank, approx.: lieutenant colonel (Ir.); colonel (mil., U.A.R.)
عقيدة ‘aqīda pl. عقائد ‘aqā’id  article of faith, tenet, doctrine; dogma; creed, faith, belief; conviction; O ideology │ عقيدة خرافية (kurāfīya) superstition; عقيدتي في according to my conviction, as I believe
عقائدي ‘aqā’idī O ideological
اعقدa‘qad  (elative) knottier, more knotted; more complicated, more difficult;
-- a‘qad , f. عقداء ‘aqdā’ knotty, knotted, guarded │ عقداء عصا (‘aṣan) knotty stick, brier cane
معقد ma‘qid pl. معاقد ma‘āqid  piece where s.th. is knotted or tied in a knot or knots; point where s.th. joins or meets, a junction, a juncture, a joint, a seam │ معقد the object on which s.o. pins his hopes; ال جفنه بمعقد الكرى يأخذ (karā bi-m. jafnihī) no slumber closed his lids
تعقيد ta‘qīd complication, entanglement, involvement; complicatedness, intricacy; complexity, tangledness; pl. -āt intricate, complicated problems
تعقد ta‘aqqud complicatedness, complexity, intricacy
انعقاد in‘iqād meeting, convening, session (of a committee, and the like) │ االنعقاد دور daur al-in. session, term (parl.)
اعتقاد i‘tiqād (firm) belief, faith, trust, confidence, conviction; -- (pl. -āt) (religious) creed, faith; article of faith; principle of faith, tenet; doctrine; dogma 628
اعتقاد i‘tiqād dogmatic; (pl. -ūn) dogmatist │ االعتقادي المعھد (madhab) dogmatism
عاقد ‘āqid legally competent to contract (Isl. Law)
معقود ma‘qūd knit, knotted, etc., see عقد (of milk) curdled │ اللسان معقود tongue-tied, incapable of speech │ ان معقودا األعمال كان (amalu) it was hoped that …
معقد mu‘aqqad knotted, knotty, gnarl.d; complicated, intricate, entangled, snarled, involved, difficult
معاقد mu‘āqad contracting party, contractant, contractor
متعاقد muta‘āqid: متعاقدان the two contracting parties
معتقد mu‘taqad believed; ان المعتقد it is believed that ..., it is held that …; -- (pl.
-āt) article of faith, principle of faith, tenet; doctrine; dogma; creed, faith; conviction, belief, view, opinion
عقر ‘aqara i (‘aqr) to wound (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.);
-- ‘aqura u and ‘aqara i (‘uqr, ‘aqr, عقارة ‘aqāra) to be barren, sterile; to be childless III to be addicted, be given (ھ to s.th., e.g., to drinking) IV to stun, stupefy (ه s.o.)
 عقر ‘uqr, ‘aqr barrenness, sterility; middle, center │ الدار عقر في within the house itself (not outside the house); عقر في داره in his own house; ديارھم عقر في within the country; in their own country, on their own ground
عقر ‘uqr indemnity for illicit sexual intercourse with a woman slave (Isl. Law); childless man
عقار ‘aqār pl. -āt immovable property, immovables, real property, real estate, realty; piece of real estate, landed property
عقار ‘uqār residue
عقاري ‘aqārī of or pertaining to immovable property, immovables, landed property, or real estate; consisting in immovable property, immovables, landed property, or real estate; landed │ عقاري بنك real-estate bank, land-mortgage bank; رھن عقاري (rahn) mortgage on landed property, landed security; العقاري القسم (qism) real- estate administration (Tun.); عقاري ملك (milk) landed property
عقور ‘aqūr mordacious, rapacious, voracious (animal)
عقار ‘aqqār pl. عقاقير ‘aqāqīr  drug; medicament, remedy
عقارة ‘aqāra barrenness, sterility
عقيرة ‘aqīra voice
عاقر ‘āqir (f.) barren, sterile (woman)
عقرب ‘aqrab pl. عقارب ‘aqārib  scorpion; sting, prick; hand (of a watch or clock); look, curl; العقرب Scorpio (astron.)
معقرب mu‘aqrab crooked, curved, curled
عقص ‘aqaṣa i (‘aqṣ) to braid, plait (ھ the hair)
عقاص ‘aqā’iṣ , عقائص pl. ‘aqīṣa عقيصة
‘iqāṣ braid, plait (of hair), lock
عقعق ‘aq‘aq pl. عقاعق ‘aqā‘iq  magpie (zol.)
عقف ‘aqafa i (‘aqf) to crook, hook, bend sharply (ھ s.th.) II = I
عقفة ‘uqfa pl. -āt loop, ring, eyelet (to hold a button, the cords of the ‘iqāl, and the like)
اعقف a‘qaf , f. عقفاء ‘aqfā’  crooked, bent, hooked
O معقف ma‘qif square bracket
معقوف ma‘qūf crooked, bent, hooked; bent at the ends, handlebar-shaped (mustache); dual معقوفان square brackets (typ.) │ المعقوف الصليب the swastika
منعقف mun‘aqif square bracket │ بين منعقفين in square brackets 629
عقل ‘aqala i (‘aql) to hobble with the ‘iqāl ( عقال q.v.; البعير al-ba‘īra the camel); to intern, confine, detain, arrest, put under arrest (ه s.o.); to throw (ه s.o.) in wrestling; to pay blood money or wergild (ل ه for the slain to s.o.); to be endowed with (the faculty of) reason, be reasonable, have intelligence; to be in one’s senses, be conscious; to realize, comprehend, understand (ھ s.th.) │ لسانه عقل (lisānahū) to tongue-tie s.o., make s.o. speechless II to make (ه s.o.) reasonable or sensible, bring (ه s.o.) to reason V to be or become reasonable, sensible, rational, intelligent, judicious, prudent, wise; to comprehend, grasp (ه s.th.) VIII to arrest, put under arrest, apprehend, detain (ه s.o.); to intern (ه s.o.); to seize, impound (ھ s.th.)
عقل ‘aql blood money, bloodwite, wergild; (pl. عقول ‘uqūl) sense, sentience, reason, understanding, comprehension, discernment, insight, rationality, mind, intellect, intelligence │ العقل مختل muktall al-‘a. mentally deranged, demented, insane, mad; العقل (صحيح) سليم sane; O العقل الباطن (or الالشعوري, or الواعي غير) (lā-šu‘ūrī, gairu l-wā‘ī) the unconscious, the subliminal; O الشعوري العقل (or الواعي, or الظاھر) (šu‘ūrī) the subconscious, the coconscious; O المميز العقل (mumayyiz) the conscious; O الكتروني عقل electronic computer
عقلي ‘aqlī reasonable, rational; ratiocinative; mental; intellectual; (pl. -ūn) rationalist; an intellectual; العقليات
al-‘aqlīyāt the mental world │ العقلي المذھب (madhab) rationalism; العقلية األمرض mental diseases
عقلية ‘aqlīya mentality, mental attitude
عقلة ‘uqla pl. عقل ‘uqal knot, knob, node (e.g., of a reed, cane, etc.); joint, articulation; knuckle; layer (hort.); trapeze
 عقال ‘iqāl pl. عقل ‘uqul cord used for hobbling the feet of a camel; a headband made of camel’s hair, holding the kūfīya in place │ عقالھا من حربا اطلق (aṭlaqa ḥarban) to unleash or start a war
عقول ‘aqūl understanding, reasonable, sensible, discerning, intelligent; costive medicine; (and عاقول ‘āqūl) a low spiny shrub of the steppes of North Africa and Western Asia (camel’s-thorn, Alhagi maurorom; Alhagi manniferom Desv.; bot.)
عقيلة ‘aqīla pl. عقائل ‘aqā’il  the best, the pick; wife, spouse │ عقيلته السيدة (sayyida) his wife; الصفات عقائل ‘a. aṣ-ṣifāt the very best qualities
اعقل a‘qal  brighter, smarter, more intelligent
معقل ma‘qil pl. معاقل ma‘āqil  refuge, sanctuary; stronghold, fortress, fort; O pillbox, bunker, dugout (mil.); fortified position
معقل ma‘qula pl. معاقل ma‘āqil  blood money, wergild
تعقل ta‘aqqul understanding, discernment, prudence, judiciousness, wisdom │ بتعقل sensibly, intelligently
اعتقال i‘tiqāl pl. -āt arrest, detention, internment; cramp, spasm │ االعتقال معسكر mu‘askar al-i‘t. concentration camp
عاقل ‘āqil pl. -ūn, عقالء ‘uqalā’ , عقال ‘uqqāl understanding, reasonable, sensible, rational, discerning, intelligent, prudent, judicious, wile; in full possession of one’s mental faculties, compos mentis, sane in mind
عاقلة ‘āqila a clan committed by unwritten law of the Bedouins to pay the
bloodwite for each of its members
معقول ma‘qūl reasonable, sensible, intelligible, comprehensible, understandable, plausible, logical; rational; apprehensive faculty, comprehension, intellect, discernment, judiciousness, judgment; common sense │ معقول unintelligible, 630  incomprehensible, nonsensical, incongruous, preposterous, absurd
معقولية ma‘qūlīya, comprehensibility, intelligibility; logicality, rationality, or reasonable character, logicality, rationality, reasonableness
معتقل mu‘taqal pl. -āt concentration camp; prison camp; internment camp, detention camp
عقم ‘aqama u and ‘aquma u (‘aqm; ‘uqm) to be barren, sterile (womb, woman); -- aqama i (‘aqm) to render barren (ھ the womb) II to render sterile or barren, sterilize (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to degerminate (ه s.th.); to pasteurize (ه s.th.); to disinfect (ه s.th.) V to be rendered barren, be sterilized
عقم ‘aqm, ‘uqm, ‘aqam barrenness, sterility
عقمة ‘uqma barrenness, sterility
عقيم ‘aqīm pl. عقم ‘uqum, عقام ‘iqām barren; sterile; useless, unavailing, futile, fruitless, ineffectual, ineffective, unproductive (e.g., work, attempt)
تعقيم ta‘qīm sterilization, degermination, pasteurization; disinfection
O معقم mu‘aqqim disinfector, disinfecting apparatus
معقم mu‘aqqam sterilized, pasteurized, disinfected, degerminated
عك ‘akka i (‘akk) to be sultry, muggy (day)
عك ‘akk sultry, muggy, sweltering
عكة ‘akka , عكاء ‘akkā’  and عكا ‘akkkā
Acre (seaport in Palestine)
عكيك ‘akīk sultry, muggy, sweltering (day)
عكر ‘akira a (‘akar) to be or become turbid, muddy, roily II to render turbid, to roil, to muddy (ھ or على s.th.); to disturb, trouble (ھ or على s.th.) │ الصفو عكر (ṣafwa) to destroy the untroubled state, disturb
the order; صفوه عكر (ṣafwahū) and عكر الصفو عليه (ṣafwa) to kill s.o.’s good spirits, spoil s.o.’s good humor V to become turbid, become muddy; to deteriorate, be aggravated, become worse (situation)
عكر ‘amr turbidity, muddiness; sediment, dregs, lees
 عكر ‘akir turbid, muddy, roily; troubled, disturbed
عكارة ‘akāra, ‘ikāra (eg.) sediment, dregs, lees
تعكير ta‘kīr (act of) rendering turbid, roiling, muddying; disturbance, troubling, derangement
معكر mu‘akkar turbid, sedimentous, roiled, muddy; disturbed, troubled
عكز V to lean (على on a staff)
عكاكيز -āt, pl. ‘ukkāza عكازة ‘ukkāz, عكاز
‘akākīz  staff, stick; crutch
عكس ‘akasa i (‘aks) to reverse, invert (ھ s.th.); to reflect, throw back, cast back, mirror (ھ s.th.) III to counteract, oppose, contradict ( ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), thwart (ھ s.th.); to disturb, trouble (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to molest, vex, tease, harass (ه s.o.) VI to be reversed, be inverted; to be thrown back, be cast back, be reflected, be mirrored VII to be reversed, be inverted; to turn back (على against); to redound (على to, on); to be thrown back, be cast back (على or عن by), be reflected, be mirrored (على or عن by, in)
عكس ‘aks reversal, reversion, inversion; reflection; opposite, contract, contrary, reverse │ ذلك عكس ‘aksa d. and عكس على ذلك in contrast with that, contrary to that; من العكس على كان to be in contrast to, be in opposition to; بالعكس  on the contrary, conversely; بالعكس والعكس and vice versa; ١٣٦ وعكسا طردا المسألة بحث (mas’alata ṭardan) he studied the problem from all sides or in all its aspects
عكسي ‘aksī contrary, opposite, contrasting, antithetical, adverse
عكيس ‘akīs layer, shoot, cion (hort.)
معاكسة mu‘ākasa pl. as disturbance; molestation, pestering, harassment; struggle, fight, battle │ الجوية الحالة معاكسة (jawwīya) inclemency of the weather
انعكاسي in‘ikāsī reflection; (pl. -āt) reflex
انعكاسي in‘ikāsī reflectional, reflexive, reflex (adj.) │ انعكاسية حركة (ḥaraka) reflex action, reflex (physiol.)
عاكس ‘ākis screen, lamp shade; reflector
عاكسة ‘ākisa reflector; eye shade; lamp shade
معاكس mu‘ākis counter-, contra-, anti-
counterattack (hajma) ھجمة معاكسة
متعاكس muta‘ākis contrasting, opposite, opposed, conflicting
منعكس mun‘akis reflected │ منعكسة صورة (ṣūra) mirror image, reflected image, reflection, reflex; منعكسة افعال reflex actions
عكاشة ‘akāša awkwardness, clumsiness
عكاشة ‘ukāša, ‘ukāša spider; spider web, cobweb
عكف ‘akafa u i (عكف ‘ukuf) to adhere, cling, stick, keep (على to); to give o.s. over, apply o.s., devote o.s., be addicted (على to s.th.), indulge (على in s.th.), be obsessed ( على by), be bent, be intent (على on s.th.); to be busily engaged (على in), busy o.s. (على with); to remain uninterruptedly (في in); to seclude o.s., isolate o.s. (في in, at a place), withdraw, retire (في into, to a place); -- ‘akafa u i (‘akf) to hold back, restrain, keep (عن ه s.o. from) II to hold back, restrain, keep (ه عن s.o. from) V to remain uninterruptedly (ھ in); to seclude o.s., isolate o.s. (في in, at a place; عن from), withdraw, retire (في into, to a place; عن from); to live in seclusion. in retirement ( عن from) VIII = V; to devote o.s., apply
o.s. assiduously (الى to s.th.), busy o.s. (الى with)
عاكف pl. -ūn, عكوف ‘ukūf, عكف ‘ukkaf given, addicted (على to s.th.); obsessed ( على by), bent, intent (على on); busily engaged (على in), busy (على with)
عكم ‘akama i (‘akm) to bundle up, pack, tie in a cloth, and the like (ھ s.th.)
علو see ‘alu عل  
  عل ‘alla, لعل la-‘alla (particle; with accusative noun immediately following) perhaps, maybe │ لعل يدري من (man yadrī) who knows if …
  عل ‘alla i and pass. ‘ulla to be or fall ill II to occupy, busy, keep busy, entertain, distract (ه ب s.o. with); to justify, motivate, explain (ه ب s.th. with) │ علل ب (النفس) نفسه to indulge in the hope that
…, entertain or cherish the hope of or that
…, be given to the illusion that ...; نفسه علل
 بآمال to indulge in hopes; to entertain vain hopes; ب اآلمال علل to cherish the hope
of ...; بالوعود علله to put s.o. off with promises V to occupy o.s., busy o.s., amuse o.s., distract o.s., divert o.s. (ب with); to make an excuse, offer a pretext; to offer or use as an excuse, offer a pretext (ب s.th.); to use as an expedient, as a makeshift (ب s.th.) │ بعلة تعلل (bi-‘illatin) to make a pretext, plead s.th. as an excuse VIII to be or fall ill; to be weak, defective; to make an excuse, offer a pretext; to adduce, give, offer (ب a reason or excuse, على for s.th.); to pretend, purport, allege, feign, dissimulate, offer as a pretext or excuse (ب s.th.) 632
علة ‘illa pl. -āt, علل ‘ilal illness, sickness, disease, malady; deficiency, defect, weakness; weakness, defectiveness (of a letter or word; gram.); metrical variation or irregularity (prosody); -- (pl. علل ‘ilal) cause, reason, occasion; excuse, pretense, pretext, plea │ العلة حروف the weak letters (و ي، ا،; gram.); عالته على in spite of his weaknesses, such as he is; العلة والمعلول cause and effect; في العلل علة the principal cause of ..., the deeper reason underlying ...
علة ‘alla pl. -āt concubine │ العالت بنو banū l-‘a. sons of a man by different mothers
عليل ‘alīl pl. اعالء a‘illa’ sick, ill, ailing; sick person, patient; soft, gentle, mild, pleasant
علية ‘illīya causality
علية ‘ilya, ‘ullīya and عليون ‘illīyūn see
علو
عاللة ‘ulāla comfort, consolation; remainder, remnant, rest
تعليل ta‘līl pl. -āt entertainment, diversion, distraction; argumentation, justification, motivation, explanation
تعلة ta‘illa pl. -āt pretext, pretense, excuse; makeshift, expedient, substitute, surrogate
اعتالل i‘tilāl illness, sickness, disease, malady; weakness, defectiveness
معلول ma‘lūl ill, sick, ailing; effect │ والمعلول العلة (‘illa) cause and effect; اتخذ
علة المعلول ittakada l-ma‘lūla ‘illatan to mistake cause and effect
معل mu‘all ill, sick, ailing
معتل mu‘tall ill, sick, ailing; weak (letter; gram.); defective (word; gram.)
علب II to can, tin, preserve in cans (ھ s.th.)
علبة ‘ulba pl. علب ‘ulab, عالب ‘ilāb box, case; can, tin; etui
علج III to treat (ه s.o., a patient; ھ a disease, also a subject); to occupy o.s., concern o.s., have to do, deal (ه ھ، with s.o., with s.th.), attend, turn (ه ھ، to s.o., to s.th.); to cultivate (ھ s.th., e.g., a literary genre); to take up (ھ s.th.), go in (ھ for s.th.), apply
o.s. (ھ to s.th.); to take upon o.s. (ھ s.th.), undergo (ھ s.th.); to work (ھ s.th. or on s.th.), process, treat, manipulate, handle (ھ s.th.); to endeavor, take pains, try hard (ان or ھ to do s.th.); to palpate, paw, finger, touch (ه s.o.), fumble around (ه on s.o.); to influence (ه s.o.), work (ه upon s.o. by arguments or persuasions), prevail (ه on s.o.) │ األخير الرمق عالج (ramaqa) to be on the verge of death, be dying; بطعنة عالجه
(bi-ṭa‘natin) to land a stab on s.o., stab
s.o. VI to be under medical treatment, receive or undergo medical treatment VIII to wrestle, struggle, fight (with one another); to be in violent commotion or agitation, heave, surge, tremble
علج ‘ilj pl. علوج ‘ulūj infidel; uncouth fellow, lout
معالجة mu‘ālaja treatment (of a patient, also of a subject); nursing (of a patient); cultivation (of an art); manipulation, handling, processing, treatment (of a material, etc.)
عالج ‘ilāj medical treatment; remedy; cure, therapy
تعالج ta‘āluj curative, therapeutic
علف ta‘āluj medical treatment (which one undergoes)
علف ‘alafa i (‘alf) to feed, fodder (ھ livestock)
‘ilāf, عالف a‘lāf, اعالف pl. ‘alaf علف
علوفة ‘ulūfa fodder, forage, provender
عالف ‘allaf pl. ة seller of provender
 علوفة ‘alūfa pl. عالئف ‘alā’if  stall-fed animal; -- (pl. علف ‘uluf) fodder, forage, provender 633
معلف mi‘laf pl. معالف ma‘ālif  manger, trough
معلوف ma‘laf stall-fed, fattened (animal)
علق ‘aliqa a (‘alaq) to hang, be suspended, dangle; to stick, cling, cleave, adhere (ب to); to catch (ب on, في in), get caught or stuck (ب on, في in); to be attached, affixed, subjoined (ب to s.th.); -- (علوق ‘ulūq, عالقة ‘alāqa) to keep (ب to s.o.), he attached, be devoted (ب to s.o.), be fond (ب of s.o.); (with foll. imperf.) to begin, commence
to ..., start doing s.th.; -- ‘aliqat (علوق ‘ulūq) to become pregnant, conceive (woman) II to hang, suspend (على or ه ب s.th. on), attach, hitch, fasten, affix, tie (ھ s.th. على or ب to); to leave undecided, keep pending, keep in abeyance (ھ s.th.); to make dependent or conditional (ھ s.th. ب or على on); to comment (على on s.th.); annotate, gloss, furnish with notes or a commentary (على s.th.), remark, state (على with regard to); to make notes (ھ of s.th.), jot down (ھ s.th.) │ على اآلمال علق to set one’s hopes on; على (خطورة) اھمية علق (ahammīyatan) to attach importance to s.th. IV to hang, suspend (ھ ب s.th. on), attach, hitch, fasten, affix, tie (ھ ب s.th. to); to apply leeches V to hang, be suspended, dangle (ب from); to cling, cleave, adhere (ب to); to keep, stick, hang on (ب to); to be attached, be devoted (ب to), be fond (ب of s.o.); to depend, be dependent or conditional (على or ب on); to refer, pertain, belong,
be related (ب to), be connected, have to do (ب with), concern (ب s.th.) │ بحبه تعلق (bi-ḥubbihī) to be fond of s.o., be affectionately attached to s.o.; ب تعلق فيما with regard to, as to, regarding, concerning
علق ‘ilq, ‘alq pl. اعالق a‘lāq precious thing, object of value
علق ‘alaq (con.; n. un. ة) pl. -āt medicinal leech; leech; (coagulated) blood, blood clot
علقة ‘alqa (eg.) beating; bastinado; a thrashing, spanking
عليق ‘alīq pl. عالئق ‘alā’iq  fodder, forage, provender
علق 'ullaiq twining and creeping plants or shrubs (of various kinds); the lesser bindweed (Convolvulus arvensis; bot.; common English blackberry, bramble (Rubus fruticosus; bot.); blackberry; raspberry
عليقة ‘ullaiqa: موسى عليقة ‘u. mūsā the Burning Bush
عالق ‘allāq cost hanger
عالقة ‘alāqa attachment, devotion, affection, bond; (pl. -āt, عالئق ‘alā’iq ) relation, affiliation, association, contact, bond, connection (ب with) │ العامة العالقات public relations; ب عالقة ذو connected with, related to; العالقة ذات السلطات (sulṭāt) the competent authorities; العالئق) العالقات قطع) qaṭ‘ al-‘a. severance of relations; توتر العالئق) العالقات) tawattur al-‘a. tenseness of relations, tension in the relations
عالقة ‘ilāqa pl. عالئق ‘alā’iq  a strap, and the like, for suspending s.th.
عالقة ‘allāqa coat hanger
اعلق a‘laq : بالذھن اعلق (dihn) that to which the mind is more inclined
معالق mi‘lāq pl. معاليق ma‘ālīq  pluck (of an animal)
تعليق ta‘līq hanging, suspending; temporary stay, remission or abrogation, suspension; the oblique, “hanging” ductus (in Arabic calligraphy); (pl. -āt, تعاليق ta‘ālīq ) commentary, comment(s), explanatory remarks; suspended lamp │ الطالق تعليق t. aṭ-ṭalāq conditional repudiation, conditional pronunciation of the talak (Isl. Law); األنباء على تعليق (anbā’) news commentary (radio) 634
تعليقة ta‘līqa pl. -āt, تعاليق ta‘ālīq  marginal note, annotation, note, gloss, scholium
تعلق ta‘alluq attachment, devotion (ب to), affection (ب for); linkage, connection, relationship (ب with)
معلق mu‘alliq commentator (radio, press)
 معلق mu‘allaq suspended, hanging; in suspense, in abeyance, pending, undecided; hinging (ب on); depending,
dependent, conditional (ب or على on), conditioned (ب or على by) │ معلق جسر (jisr) suspension bridge; معلق حساب suspense account; معلقة قاطرات suspension railways; معلقة مسائل pending questions; ب معلقة رغبته (ragbatuhū) his desire is directed toward
…
معلقة mu‘allaqa pl. -āt placard, poster, bill; المعلقات the oldest collection of complete ancient Arabic kasidas
متعلق muta‘alliq attached, devoted (ب to); connected (ب with), related, pertaining (ب to), concerning (ب s.o. or s.th.) │ متعلق بحبه (bi-ḥubbihī) affectionately attached to s.o.; متعلقاته من depending on s.o. or s.th., pertaining to s.o.’s authority
علقم ‘alqam pl. عالقم ‘alāqim  colocynth (bot.)
│ العلقم ذاق to taste bitterness suffer annoyance, vexation, chicanery or torments (من from)
علك ‘alaka u i (‘alk) to chew, champ (ھ s.th., esp. اللجام the bit, of a horse)
علك ‘ilk mastic
علم ‘alima a (‘ilm) to know (ب or ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), have knowledge, be cognizant, be aware (ب or ھ of s.th.), be informed (ب or ھ about or of s.th.), be familiar, be acquainted (ب or ھ with s.th.); to perceive, discern (ب or ھ s.th.), find out (ب or ھ about s.th., من from), learn, come to know (ب or ھ s.th. or about s.th., من from); to distinguish, differentiate (ھ من s.th. from) II to teach (ه ب or ه ھ s.o. s.th.), instruct, brief (ه ب or ه ھ s.o. in s.th.); to train. school, educate (ه s.o.); to designate, mark, earmark, provide with a distinctive mark (على s.th.); to put a mark (على on) IV to let (ه s.o.) know (ب or ھ s.th. or about s.th.), tell (ب or ه ھ s.o. about), notify, advise, apprise, inform (ه ب or ه ھ s.o. of or about s.th.). acquaint (ه ب or ه ھ s.o. with) V to learn, study (A s.th.); to know ( ھ s.th.) X to inquire (ه عن or ه ھ of s.o. about), ask, query (ه عن or ه ھ s.o. about), inform o.s. (ه ھ or ه ھ through s.o. about). gather information (ه عن or ه ھ from s.o. about)
علم ‘ilm knowledge, learning, lore; cognizance, acquaintance; information; cognition, intellection, perception, knowledge; (pl. علوم ‘ulūm) science; pl. العلوم the (natural) sciences │ وعمال علما ‘ilman wa-‘amalan theoretically and practically; علمه في ليكن (li-yakun) be it known to him, may he know, for his information; ب تام علم على كان (tāmm) to know s.th. inside out, be thoroughly familiar with s.th.; to have full cognizance of s.th.; الجراثيم علم bacteriology; االجتماع علم sociology; الحساب علم arithmetic; الحياة علم ‘i. al-ḥayāh biology; األحياء علم do.; علم الحيوان ‘i. al-ḥayawān zoology; األخالق علم ethics; الذرات علم ‘i. ad-darrāt nuclear physics; التربية علم ‘i. at-tarbiya pedagogy; الصحة علم ‘i. aṣ-ṣiḥḥa hygiene; األصوات علم phonetics; المعادن علم ‘i. al-ma‘ādīn mineralogy; اللغة علم ‘i. al-luga lexicography; النباتات علم ‘i. an-nabātāt botany; النفس علم ‘i. an-nafs psychology; األعضاء وظائف علم ‘i. w. al-a‘ḍā’ physiology; علم طالب ṭālib ‘ilm student; كلية العلوم kullīyat al-‘u. the Faculty of Science of the Egyptian University
علمي ‘ilmī scientific; erudite (book); learned (society) 635
علم ‘alam pl. اعالم a‘lām sign, token, mark, badge, distinguishing mark, characteristic; harelip; road sign, signpost, guidepost; flag, banner; a distinguished, outstanding man; an eminent personality, au authority, a star, a luminary; proper name (gram.) علم على نار من اشھر very famous; العلم اسم ismun ‘alamun or ism ‘alamin pl. األعالم اسماء proper name (gram.); الوصول علم receipt
عالم ‘ālam pl. -ūn, عوالم ‘awālim  world; universe, cosmos; العالمان al-‘ālamān the two worlds = Europe and America; عالمون ‘ālamūn inhabitants of the world, specif. human beings │ الحيوان عالم ‘a. al-ḥayawān the animal kingdom; المعادن عالم ‘ā. al- ma‘ādin the mineral kingdom; النبات عالم ‘ā. an-nabāt the vegetable kingdom; عالم الوجود this world, this life
عالمي ‘ālami worldly, secular, world (adj.); international; world-wide, world- famous, enjoying world-wide renown
 عالمية ‘ālamīya internationality;
‘ālimīya see after ‘ālim
علماني ‘almānī, عالماني laic, lay; (pl. -ūn) layman (in distinction from the clergy)
علم ‘alīm pl. علماء ‘ulamā’ knowing; cognizant, informed; learned, erudite; العليم the omniscient (one of the attributes of God)
عالم ‘allām knowing thoroughly (with foll. genit.: s.th.), completely familiar (with)
عالم ‘alāma see على (prep.) under علو عالمة ‘allāma most erudite, very
learned
عالمة ‘alāma pl. -āt, عالئم ‘alā’im  mark, sign, token; badge, emblem; distinguishing mark, characteristic indication,
of token in (‘alāma) عالمة ھذا │ syptom (tijārīta) عالمة تجارية that; of sign a as that, of insignia rutba ‘a. عالمة الرتبة trade-mark; عالمة and at-ta’attur ‘a. عالمة التأثر O rank; point; exclamation at-ta‘ajub ‘a. التعجب عالمة O mark; question عالمة االستفھام mark quotation التنصيص
عيلم ‘ailam tender; (pl. عيالم ‘ayālim ) well with abundant water; sea
اعلومة a‘lūma pl. اعاليم a‘ālim  road sign, signpost, guidepost
تعالمة ti‘lāma moot erudite, very learned
معلم ma‘lam pl. معالم ma‘ālim  place, abode, locality, spot; track, trace; landmark, mark, distinguishing mark, characteristic; road sign, signpost, guidepost; peculiarity, particularity; pl. sights, curiosities; characteristic traits; outlines, contours (e.g., of the body), lineaments, features (of the face)
معلمة ma‘lama pl. -āt encyclopedia
تعليم ta‘līm pl. -āt, تعليماتا ta‘līm  information, advice, instruction, direction; teaching, instruction; training, schooling, education; apprenticeship; pl. تعليمات instructions, directions, directives; information, announcements │ مختلط تعليم (muktaliṭ) coeducation; عال تعليم (‘ālin) higher education, academic studies, مراقب
تعليم murāqib t. a military rank, approx.: master sergeant (Eg. 1939); تعليم صول ṣol t. do. (Eg.); O التعليم فن fann at-t. pedagogy, pedagogics
تعليمي ta‘līmī instructional, educational
اعالم i‘lām notification, advice; information; notice
تعلم ta‘allum learning, studying, study; education
استعالم isti‘lām inquiry (عن about); (pl.
-āt) Information │ االستعالمات مكتب maktab al-i. information office, information desk; news agency, press agency, wire service
عالم ‘ālim knowing; familiar, acquainted (ب with), cognizant (ب of); expert, connoisseur, professional, (pl. 636 علماء ‘ulamā’ ) learned, erudite; scholar, savant, scientist │ طبيعي عالم (ṭabī‘ī) physicist, natural scientist; المختصون العلماء (muktaṣṣūn) the specialists, the experts
عالمة ‘ālima woman of learning, woman scholar; (eg.) singer, chanteuse
عالمية ‘ālimīya learnedness, scholarliness, erudition, rank or dignity of a ‘ālim; rank of scholarship, conferred by diploma, of the Great Mosque in Tunis and of Al Azhar in Cairo
اعلم a‘lam  having more knowledge; more learned │ اعلم ﷲ God knows best
معلوم ma‘lūm known; fixed, determined, given; of course! certainly! sure! no doubt! (as an affirmative reply); known quantity (math.); المعلوم the active voice (gram.); -- (pl. معاليم ma‘ālim) fixed sum, fixed rate (money); fixed income; tax, duty; fee; sum, amount, cost(s) │ معلوم الحيوانات m. al-ḥayawānāt impost on livestock (Tun.); -- pl. معلومات ma‘lūmāt knowledge, lore, learning, perceptions, discoveries, findings; known facts; information, data; news, tidings
معلم mu‘allim pl. -ūn teacher, instructor; master (of a trade, etc.) │ االعتراف معلم father-confessor, confessor
معلمة mu‘allima pl. -āt woman teacher, woman instructor
معلم mu‘allam taught, instructed, trained, schooled; عليه معلم designated,
 red with marked معلم عليه باألحمر │ marked pencil
متعلم muta‘allim apprentice; educated; an educated person
علن ‘alana u, ‘aluna u (علن ‘alāniya) to be or become known, manifest, evident III to indicate, make known, reveal, disclose (ه ب to s.o. s.th.) IV to manifest, reveal, make known (ھ s.th.); to make public, publicize, publish, disclose, declare, announce, proclaim, promulgate (ھ s.th.); to state frankly (الى ھ to s.o. s.th.); to announce (ان that); to issue a summons ( الى to s.o.); to give notice (عن of); to advertise (عن s.th., e.g., the rent or sale of s.th. in a newspaper); to give evidence (عن of), indicate, show, betray, bespeak (عن s.th.) │ عليه الحرب اعلن (ḥarba) to declare war on s.o. VIII = I; :x: - I; to seek to bring out or to disclose (ھ s.th.); to bring to light (ھ s.th.)
علنا ‘alanan openly, overtly, publicly, in public
علني ‘alanī open, overt, public
علن ‘alin open, overt, public; evident, patent
عالنية ‘alānīya openness, overtness, publicness, publicity (as opposed to secrecy); ‘alāniyatan openly, overtly, publicly, patently, in public
اعالن i‘lān pl. -āt publication, promulgation; revelation, manifestation; proclamation; declaration, statement, pronouncement; announcement, notice; advertising, publicity (عن for); advertisement, ad; poster, bill, placard │ حضور اعالن i. ḥuḍūr summons; الحرب اعالن
اعالن عدم الثقة war; of declaration al-ḥarb i.
i. ‘adam at-tiqa vote of “no confidence”; مبوبة اعالنات (mubawwaba) classified ads; ضوئية اعالنات (ḍau’īya) electric signs, sky signs
معلن mu‘lin announcer, master of ceremonies (e.g., in a cabaret)
معلن mu‘lan: اليه معلن summoned (before a court)
علو) and عال (على ‘alā u (‘ulūw) to be high, elevated, rise high, loom, tower up; to rise, ascend; to ring out (voice); to heave
(chest); to be higher or taller (عن or ه ھ، than s.o., than s.th.), (over)top (عن or ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), tower (عن or ه ھ، over s.o., 637 over s.th.), be located or situated higher ( عن or ھ than s.th.); to be attached, fixed or fastened above or on top of s.th. (ھ); to rise (عن or ھ above s.th.); to exceed, excel, surpass (ه ھ، or عن s.o., s.th.); to be too high (ه ھ، or عن for s.o., for s.th.); to overcome, overwhelm (على or ه s.o.), get the better of s.o. (ه); to turn upward; to ascend, mount, climb, scale (ھ s.th.); to overspread, cover (ھ s.th.), come, descend (ه ھ، upon s.o., upon s.th.), befall, seize (
ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) │ به عال to raise s.th. or s.o.; to exalt, extol s.o.; السن به علت (sinnu) be bad attained great age, he was an old man; ب صوته عال (ṣautuhū) hie voice rang out with ..., he exclaimed ... aloud; -- على ‘aliya a (عالء ‘alā’) to be high, elevated; to excel, stand out, surpass; -- على ‘alā i (‘aly) to climb (السطح as-saṭḥa to the roof)
│ الصدأ األداة عال (adāta, ṣada’u) rust has covered the tool; األموات صفرة وجھه علت ‘alat wajhahū ṣufrat l-a. deathly pallor suffused his face; السآمة علته ‘alathu s- sa’āma he was overcome by fatigue; علت رغوة شفتيه ‘alat šafataihi ragwa foam appeared on his lips II to raise, raise aloft, lift, hoist, lift up, elevate, uplift, exalt (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) IV = II │ شأنه اعلى (ša’nahū) to play up, stress, emphasize s.th., put emphasis on s.th.; to further, promote, advance s.th.; to raise s.o.’s prestige V to rise, become high VI to rise, lift, ascend, rise aloft; to resound, ring out; to be high, exalted, sublime (esp. of God); to deem
o.s. above s.o. or s.th. (على), look down ( على on s.o. or s.th.); to stay away (عن from); تعال ta‘āla come (here)! come on! Let’s go! forward! VIII to rise, lift, ascend, rise aloft; to rise high, tower up; to mount, ascend, climb, scale (ھ s.th.); to step (up) (ھ on s.th.); to be enthroned, be perched (ھ on s.th.); to tower (ھ above s.th.); to ascend the throne; to accede to a high office X to rise, to tower (على above); to master (على s.th.); to take possession ( على of s.th.), appropriate (على s.th.)
عل ‘alu: عل من min ‘alu from above
علو ‘ulūw height, tallness, elevation, altitude; greatness, grandeur, highness,
 exaltedness, sublimity │ الصوت علو ‘u. aṣ- ṣaut sound volume, sound intensity; علو الكعب ‘u. al-ka‘b high, outstanding position
علوي ‘ulwī upper; heavenly, divine │ علوية ارادة (irāda) supreme will, divine decree
علوي ‘alawī upper; heavenly, celestial; Alawi (adj. and n.); pl. العلويون the Alawis (official name of the Nusairis inhabiting the coastal district of Latakia in NW Syria)
على ‘ulan height, tallness, elevation, altitude; highness, exaltedness, augustness, sublimity; high rank
على ‘alā (prep.) on, upon, on top of, above, over (place, rank); at, on, by; in, in the state of, in the manner of, in possession of; to, toward, for; in addition to; to the debit of, to the disadvantage of; against, in spite of, despite; on the basis of, on the strength of, by virtue of, due to. upon; by, through; according to. in accordance with, pursuant to; to (one’s taste, one’s mind, one’s liking, etc.); during; (as to syntactical regimen see under respective verb) │ على من from above from upon ..., from the top of …; ان على (an, anna) on the condition that …, provided that ...; although, though, albeit; ان على (anna) (introducing a main clause) however, but, on the other hand, nevertheless, yet, still, ... though; انه على (in the subjective notion or view that …, i.e.) as, e.g.: نعمة انھا على األرض ثمرات جنى
٨٣٦ اآللھة janā tamarāti l-arḍi ‘alā annahā ni‘matu l-āliha he reaped the fruits of the earth (accepting them) as a boon bestowed by the grace of the gods; الخيل ظھر على (ẓahr l-kail) on horseback; الباخرة ظھر على aboard the steamer; عليكم السالم (salāmu) may peace be upon you │ والعين الرأس على ‘alā r-ra’s wa-l-‘ain very gladly! with pleasure! األشھاد رؤوس على publicly, for everyone to see; النار على جلس he was sitting by the fire; يمينه على (yamīnihī) to (at) his right; حال كل على (kulli) or كل على (kullin) in any case, at any rate; على الخصوص especially, particularly, specifically; اإلطالق على (iṭlāq) absolutely, unrestrictedly, without exception, in any respect, under any circumstances; على التقريب approximately, almost, nearly,
about, circa; التوالي على (tawālī) continuously, incessantly, in uninterrupted succession; ضوء على (ḍau’i) or نور على (nūri) in the light of ...; حق على كان (ḥaqqin) or الحق على كان to be on the right way, have hit on the right thing, be right; الباطل على كان or خطأ على كان (kaṭa’in) to be on the wrong way, be wrong, be mistaken; يرام ما احسن على ھو (aḥsani, yurām) he is as well as you can possibly wish (for him); من شيء على ھو ... he has certain ...; على ھو الذكاء من شيء (dakā’) he has a good deal of intelligence; شيء على ھذا ليس there is nothing in it, it’s worthless; كله ھذا من ليس شيء على all this is unfamiliar to him; he doesn’t understand a thing about it; على كان المسيح دين (dīni l-m.) to belong to the Christian religion, be a Christian; على كان ب علم (‘ilmin) to be informed about. be acquainted with ...; انتظاره على كان to wait for s.o. or s.th.; شيء غير على for no reason; األمر من بصيرة على in cognizance of the matter, knowing the matter; معالفة غير على منه (ma‘rifatin) without his knowing about it, without his knowledge, unwittingly;
ه ھ،) ب عليك or) take ...! help yourself to ...! make use of ...! بالصبر عليك (bi-ṣ-
ṣabr) you must have patience! به علينا he is the one we must have! به علي (‘alayya) bring, give him (or it) to me! I must have him (or it)! ان عليه it is incumbent on him to …; it’s his duty to ...; he must …, he will have to ...; عليك ال don’t worry! عليه ال never mind! It’s nothing! no harm done! (indicating forgiveness, indulgence); ماعلينا what of it! what does it matter! let’s forget it! من عليك ما don’t worry about ..., don’t mind …’ don’t give … a thought; ان عليه ما he doesn’t care if ; it’s of little importance to him that …; حساب علي (ḥisābihī) at his expense; دين عليه (dain) he is in debt(s); ھو قوي سنه على (sinnihī qawīy) he bears his years well; عالم ‘alāma wherefore? what for? why? االذان علي استيقظ istaiqaẓa ‘alā l- adān he awoke over the call to prayer, he was awakened by the azan; ما لسانه على قيل (qīla, lisānihī) he was supposed to have said things which …, statements were ascribed to him which ...; يده على (yadihī) through him, by him, at his hand; ذلك على in this manner, thus; accordingly, hence; يقال ما على (yuqālu) as they say, as it is said; حسب على ‘alā ḥasabi (prep.)
 according to, in accordance with, commensurate with, depending on; علي منھا طوع (‘alā) with her obeying, without opposition on her part; عادته على according to his habit, as was his wont, as he used to do; يقال ما علي (yuqālu) suddenly, all of a sudden, unawares, unexpectedly; عھد على (‘ahdi) at the time of
علي ‘alīy high, tall, elevated: exalted, sublime, lofty, august, excellent: العلي the Most High, the Supreme (one of the attributes of God) │ العلية الدولة (daula) name of the old Ottoman Empire
علية ‘ilya (pl. of علي ‘alīy): علية ,الناس علية القوم upper class, people of distinction, prominent people 639
علية ‘ullīya, ‘illīya pl. عاللي ‘alālīy
upper room, upstairs room
عليون ‘illīyūn the uppermoot heaven; loftiest heights
عالء ‘alā’ high rank, high standing, nobility
عالة ‘alāh pl. عال ‘alan anvil
علياء ‘alyā’  loftiness, exaltedness, sublimity, augustness; lofty height; heaven(s) │ العلياء اھل ahl al-‘a. people of highest social standing
عالوة ‘ilāwa addition; increase, raise, extra allowance, subsidy │ على عالوة (‘ilāwata) in addition to
عالية ‘alāya height, loftiness
اعلى a‘lā, f. عليا ‘ulyā, pl. على ‘ulan, اعال a‘ālin higher, highest; upper, uppermost; اعال a‘ālin the highest portion of s.th.; heights, peaks (fig.) │ اعاله a‘lāhu further up, above; اعاله مذكور above-mentioned; مستوى اعلى على (منعقد) مؤتمر (mu’tamar mun‘aqid, mustawan) top-level conference; صوت بأعلى bi-a‘lā ṣautin very loud, at the top of one’s voice; اعالي سفينة البحار seagoing vessel; النيل اعالي a. n-nīl the upper course of the Nile
معال ma‘ālin (pl.): األمور معالى noble things; المعالي صاحب or معاليه ma‘ālīhi His Excellency, الوزير معالي His Excellency the Minister (title of cabinet ministers)
تعلية  ta‘liya elevation, enhancement, uplift, exaltation; raising (e.g., of the voice)
اعالء i‘lā’ elevation, enhancement, uplift, exaltation; raising, lifting │ اعالء الشيء شأن i. ša’ni š. boosting, furtherance, promotion, or advancement of s.th.
اعتالء i‘tilā’ ascension (e.g., to the throne); accession to office (e.g., of a cabinet minister)
استعالء isti‘lā’ superiority
عال ‘ālin high, tall, elevated; loud, strong (voice); higher (as opposed to elementary); lofty, exalted, sublime, high- ranking, of high standing; excellent, first- class, first-rate, outstanding, of top quality (commodity) │ العالي الباب the Sublime Porte; عال ضغط (ḍagṭ) high voltage, high tension (el.); عال تواتر (tawātur) high frequency (el.); عاليه ‘āliyahū above, above-mentioned (in letters; esp. in official and business style); بعاليه مذكور
(bi-‘ālīhi) above-mentioned; (eg.) العال عال ‘āl al-āl excellent, first-rate, top-quality, A-l (merchandise)
متعال muta‘ālin high, elevated, lofty, exalted; resounding, ringing; المتعالي the Most High, the Supreme Being (one of the attributes of God)
علوان = عنون علوان = عنوان
علو see على، علية، عليون، علياء، عالية
  عم abbreviation of the formula السالم عليه
(salāmu) may peace be upon him!
عن ما(< عما( = ‘amma عم  
  عم ‘amma u (عموم ‘umūm) to be or become general, universal, common, prevalent, comprehensive, all-embracing, to spread, prevail; -- ‘amma u to comprise, include, embrace, encompass, pervade (ھ s.th.), extend, stretch, be spread, be diffused, be prevailing (ھ all over s.th.) به البلوى عمت (balwā) it has become a general necessity II to generalize (ھ s.th.); to spread universally, universalize, popularize, democratize (ھ s.th.); to make (ھ s.th.) universally accessible, open (ھ s.th.) to the public at large; to introduce (ھ s.th.)
 universally; to attire (ه s.o.) with a turban V to put on or wear a turban VIII = V
عم ‘amm pl. عموم ‘umūm, اعمام a‘mām father’s brother, paternal uncle │ العم ابن ٠٤٦ ibn al-‘amm cousin on the father’s side; العم بنت bint al-‘amm female cousin on the father’s side
عمة ‘amma pl. -āt paternal aunt
عمة ‘imma turban
عميم ‘amīm general, universal, common, prevalent; all-comprehensive
عموم ‘umūm generality, universality, prevalence; whole, total, totality, aggregate; العموم the (general) public, the public at large; عموما ‘umūman in general, generally │ خصوصا -- عموما in general in particular; العموم علي in general, generally; العموم بوجه bi-wajhi l-‘u. generally speaking, in general; القطر عموم في (‘u. il- quṭr) throughout the country; العموم مجلس majlis al-‘u. the House of Commons, the Lower House; ‘umūm frequently replaces عمومي ‘umūmī in compound terms of administrative language, e.g.: عموم جامعة العمال j. ‘u. al-‘ummāl general federation of labor; الجمارك عموم ادارة General Administration of Customs and Tariffs (Eg.); المصلحة عموم ديوان (dīwān ‘u. al- maṣlaḥa) administration headquarters, chief administration office; المالية عموم ديوان
d. ‘u. al-mālīya General Administration of Finances (Eg.); الري عموم تفتيش t. ‘u. ar- riyy General Inspectorate of Irrigation (Eg.); الجنوبي النيل عموم مفتش mufattiš ‘u. an- nīl al-janūbī Inspector General for the Southern Nile (Eg.)
عمومي ‘umūmī public; universal; general; common; state, civil, public │ عمومية جمعية (jam‘īya) plenary session; general assembly; العمومية الكتب دار (dār al- kutub) public library; عمومية اشغال public works; العمومي الصندوق (ṣundūq) public treasure
عمومة ‘umūma uncleship, unclehood; pl. of عم ‘amm
عمامة ‘imāma pl. عمائم ‘amā’im  turban
تعميم ta‘mīm generalization, universalization, general propagation or
diffusion, popularization, democratization; vulgarization
عام ‘āmm public; universal, prevalent; general; common │ العام األمن (amn) public security; عام مدير (mudīr) director general, general manager; العام الرأي (ra’y) public opinion; العام الصالح or العامة المصلحة (maṣlaḥa) public welfare, the commonweal; والعام الخاص (kāṣṣ) high and low, all men, all, everybody (also العام والخاص)
عامة ‘āmma generality; commonalty; the masses, the people; عامة ‘āmmatan in general; genera.lly; oommonly, altogether, in ths aggregate, collectively │ -- خاصة عامة (kāṣṣatan) in particular -- in general; الناس عامة the common people, the masses, the populace; والعامة الخاصة (kāṣṣa) high and low, all men, all, everybody
العوام al-‘awāmm (pl. of عامة ‘āmma) the common people, the populace; the laity (Chr.)
عامي ‘āmmī common, vulgar, plebeian, ordinary, popular: ordinary person, man in the street; العامية al-‘āmmīya popular language, colloquial language
معمم mu‘ammam wearing a turban, turbaned
عن ما = ‘ammā عما  
عمد ‘amada i (‘amd) to support, prop, shore, buttress (ھ s.th.); to intend, purpose (ل or الى or ھ s.th.); to betake o.s., repair, go (ل or الى or A to); to approach, undertake (ل or الى s.th.), go, set (ل or الى about s.th.), proceed, apply o.s., turn, attend (ل or الى to), embark (ل or الى upon); to take up (الى s.th.); to be intent (الى on s.th.): -- ‘amada i to baptize, christen (ه s.o.) II to baptize, christen (ه s.o.) IV to support, prop, shore, buttress (١٤٦ ھ s.th.); to baptize, christen (ه s.o.) V to intend, purpose, do intentionally, do on purpose (ھ s.th.); to approach (ھ s.th.) with a definite aim in mind; to single out ( ھ s.o.), aim (ه ھ، at); to be baptized, be christened │ باھانة تعمدھا ما (ihāna) he was not out to insult her, he had no intention of offending her VIII = V; to lean (على against), support one’s weight (على on); to rely, depend (ھ or ه on s.o., on s.th.); to
 use as a basis (ھ or على s.th.); to employ, use, apply (ھ s.th., e.g., a new method); to confirm (ھ s.th.); to sanction, authorize (ھ s.th.); to loan, give on credit (ل ھ to s.o. a sum)
عمد ‘amd intention, intent, design, purpose; premeditation, willfulness (jur.); عمدا ‘amdan intentionally, deliberately, on purpose; willfully, premeditatedly (jur.) │ العمد شبه šibh al-‘a. quasi-deliberate intent (Isl. Law)
عمدي ‘amdī intentional, deliberate; premeditated, willful (jur.)
عمدة ‘umda support, prop, shore; main subject, main issue, basic issue (e.g., of a controversy); (pl. عمد ‘umad) chief of a village, chief magistrate of a small community (eg.); mayor
عماد ‘imād pl. عمد ‘amad support, prop, stay (also fig.); bracket, buttress, post, pole, pillar; -- ‘imād baptism
عميد ‘amīd pl. عمداء ‘umadā’  support; head, chief; dean (of a faculty); principal, headmaster, director (of a secondary school); doyen, dean (as, of a diplomatic
corps); high commissioner (also العميد السامي), resident general; military ranks, approx. major (Eg. 1939), approx. lieutenant commander (Eg. 1939), approx. commanding) general (Ir.), lieutenant colonel (U.A.R.) │ ثان عميد (tānin) a military rank intermediate between those of major and captain, Brit.: adjutant-major (Eg. 1939); a naval rank intermediate between those of lieutenant commander and lieutenant (Eg. 1939)
عميدة ‘amīda principal, headmistress, directress (of a secondary school for girls)
عمود ‘amūd pl. اعمدة a‘mida, عمد ‘umud flagpole, shaft (of a standard); pale, post, prop, shore, pier, buttress; lamppost; (telephone, telegraph) pole; column, pillar, pilaster; stem (of a glass); -- (pl. اعمدة) column (of a newspaper); O element, cell (el.) │ الشوكي العمود (šaukī) the vertebral column, the spine; العمود الفقري (faqrī) do.; O كھربائي عمود (kahrabā’ī) electrode
عامود ‘āmūd pl. عواميد ‘awāmīd  = عمود ‘amūd │ O القيادة عامود steering column, steering mechanism (of an automobile)
عمودي ‘amūdī columnar, pillar-shaped; vertical, perpendicular, upright │ طائرة عمودية helicopter
المعمدان يوحنا yūḥannā l-ma‘madān John the Baptist
تعميد ta‘mād baptism
تعمد ta‘ammud intention, intent, design; resolution, determination, purpose; تعمدا ta‘ammudan and بتعمد intentionally, deliberately, willfully, on purpose, premeditatedly
تعمدي ta‘ammudī intentional, deliberate, premeditated, willful
اعتماد i‘timād reliance, dependence (على on), confidence, trust (علي in); confirmation; sanction, approbation, authorization; accreditation (of diplomats); (pl. -āt) credit, loan │ االعتماد النفس على (nafs) self-confidence, self- reliance; االعتماد كتب kutub al-i‘t. or اوراق االعتماد aurāq al-i‘t. credentials (of diplomats); اضافي اعتماد (iḍāfī) supplementary loan 642
معمودية ma‘mūdīya baptism; baptismal font
معمد mu‘ammad baptizee, one receiving baptism
متعمد muta‘ammid deliberate, premeditated, willful; intentional
معتمد mu‘tamad reliable, dependable; object of reliance, support; sanctioned, approved, authorized; accredited; commissioner, authorized agent, proxy, envoy, representative; commissary, commissar │ السامي المعتمد (sāmī) the High Commissioner; قنصلي معتمد (qunṣulī) consular agent (dipl.)
معتمدية mu‘tamadīya legation (dipl.)
عمر ‘amara u i (‘amr, ‘umr) to live long, be longevous; -- u i, ‘amura u (عمارة ‘amāra) to thrive, prosper, flourish, flower, bloom; to be or become inhabited, peopled, populated, civilized, cultivated; to be full, filled, filled up; -- ‘mara u to fill with life, cause to thrive, make
 prosperous; to inhabit (ھ s.th.), live, dwell (ھ in s.th.); to fill, pervade (جوانحه s.o.’s heart), reign (جوانحه in s.o.’s heart); to build, erect, construct, raise, rebuild, reconstruct, restore (ھ s.th.) II to let (ه s.o.) live, preserve (ه s.o.) alive; to prolong s.o.’s (ه) life, grant long life (ه to s.o.; of God); to populate, people (ه s.th.); to build, erect, construct, raise, rebuild, reconstruct, restore, repair, overhaul, refurbish, recondition (ھ a building); to provide, furnish, supply, fill (ھ ب s.th. with, e.g., the lamp with oil, the censer with charcoal, the goblet with wine); to load (ھ a gun); to fill (ھ a pipe); to fill in ( ھ a form, a blank; tun.) │ وقته عمر (waqtahū) to take up, or claim, s.o.’s time IV to populate, people (ھ s.th.); to perform the ‘umra (q.v.) VIII to visit (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to perform the ‘umra (q.v.) X to settle (في s.o. in); to settle, colonize (ھ s.th.); to turn (ھ a country) into a colony
عمر ‘umr (‘amr in oaths) pl. اعمار a‘mār life, duration of life, life span, lifetime; age (of a person) │ لعمري
la-‘amrī upon my life! ﷲ لعمر la-‘amru llāhi by the everlasting existence of God! by the Eternal God! العمرين ذات dāt
عمره عشرين سنة (n.); amphibian al-‘umrain
(‘išrīna sanatan) he is twenty years old
عمرة ‘amra headgear (e.g., turban); (eg.) repair, repair work
عمرة ‘amra pilgrimage to Mecca (the so-called “minor hadj” which, unlike the hadj proper, need not be performed at a particular time of the year and whose performance involves fewer ceremonies)
عمرى ‘umrā donation for life (Isl. Law)
عمارة ‘amāra (naval) fleet
عماارة ‘imāra pl. -āt, عمائر ‘amā’ir  building, edifice, structure; real estate, tract lot; العمارة or العمارة فن fann al-‘i. or العمارة ھندسة handasat al-‘i. architecture, art of building
عمران ‘umrān inhabitedness, activity, bustling life, thriving, flourishing, prosperity (as opposed to خراب karāb); populousness and prosperity (of a country); culture, civilization; building, edifice, structure
عمراني ‘umrānī cultural, civilizational; serving, or pertaining to, cultural development
عمارية ‘ammārīya camel-borne sedan and the virgin riding in it into battle
اعمر a'mGrl more inhabited, more populated, more populous; more cultivated, more civilized; more flourishing, more thriving
معمار mi‘mār builder, architect; mason 643
معماري mi‘mārī architectonic, architectural; - (pl. .IIP) builder, architect; mason │ معماري مھندس (muhandis) builder, architect; المعماري الفن (fann) art of building, architecture
تعمير ta‘mīr building, construction, election; restoration, repair, overhauling, refurbishing, reconditioning; filling, filling-up
تعميرة ta‘mīra filling, fiIling-up
استعمار isti‘mār colonizing, colonization, foundation of colonies; imperialistic exploitation; imperialism, colonialism
استعماري isti‘mārī colonial; colonizer; imperialistic
استعمارية isti‘mārīya imperialism, colonialism
عامر ‘āmir inhabited; peopled, populated, populous; full, filled, filled up; jammed, crowded, filled to capacity (ب with); amply provided, splendidly furnished; civilized; cultivated (land); flourishing, thriving, prosperous; العامر is a frequent epithet of castles, palaces, etc., of ruling houses │ باألمل عامر (amal) full of hope; الجيب عامر ‘a. al-jaib with a full pocket; ل الذمة عامر (‘ā. ad-dimma) obliged to s.o., committed to s.o.; النفس عامر (‘ā.
an-nafs) obsessed by, possessed by; عامر ام umm ‘āmir hyena (zool.); عامر نھوض voluptuous bosoms
populated, inhabited, ma‘mūr معمور (inhabited) the المعمورة or المعمور populous; all )في كل انحاء المعمور )المعمورة │ world world the throughout world, the over
معمر mu’ammir pl. -ūn colonist
 معمر mu‘ammar pl. -ūn senior (in sports)
مستعمر musta‘mir colonial, imperialistic; settler, colonist; foreign conqueror, invader; imperialist
مستعمرة musta‘mara pl. -āt colony, settlement │ O مستقلة مستعمرة (mustaqilla) dominion
اعمش a‘maš  affected with an eye disease, blear-eyed
عماص ‘umāš (eg.) mucous discharge of the eye, rheum
عمق ‘amuqa u (‘umq, عماقة ‘amāqa) to be or become deep, profound II to deepen, make deep or deeper (ھ s.th.) IV = II V to penetrate deeply, go deeply (ھ or في into s.th.), become absorbed (ھ or في in)
عمق ‘amq, ‘umq pl. اعماق a‘māq depth, profoundness, profundity; bottom │ من قلبه اعماق (a. qalbihī) from the bottom of his heart, from the depth of his soul; من النفس اعماق (a. in-nafs) do.
عميق ‘amīq deep (also of feelings), profound
عمل ‘amila a (‘amal) to do, act, operate, be active, work (also: في in a field); to make, produce, manufacture, fabricate, perform, carry out, execute (ھ s.th.); to act (ب according to, in accordance with, on the strength of, on the basis of); to operate, put into operation, set going (ب s.th.); to plan, contrive, seek to accomplish, practice, pursue (على s.th.), aim, work away (ل or على at), be out, strive (ل or على for), apply o.s. (على to), take pains, endeavor, exert o.s. (على to do s.th.), be active (على in the service of s.th.); to process, work, treat (في s.th.); to act (في upon s.th.), affect (في s.th.); (gram.) to govern (في a syntactical member) │ به يعمل (yu‘malu) it is valid, is effective, is in force (e.g., an ordinance); ترتيبات عمل to make arrangements or preparations; عمل اعماله (a‘mālahū) to behave, or act, like s.o.; يعول علي وال يعمل به ال (yu‘malu, yu‘awawalu) null and void II to appoint as vicegerent or governor (على ه s.o. over, of); to fester, suppurate, be purulent (wound) 644 III to apply (ب ه toward s.o. s.th.); to treat (ه ب s.o. in a manner),
proceed, deal (ب with s.o. in a manner); to trade, do business (ه with s.o.) │ بالمثل عامله bi-l-mitl) to repay s.o. like for like, treat
s.o. in like manner IV to make (ھ s.th.) work, put to work, operate, put into operation, bring to bear, employ, woe (ھ s.th.); ب or في ھ اعمل to putter, or tinker, with s.th. about s.th. else, work with s.th. on s.th. else │ الفكر اعمل (fikra) to busy the mind, think, reflect, ponder, muse; اعمل رقابھم في السيف (saifa) he caused a massacre among them, had them massacred V to go to a lot of trouble, take great pains, spend much effort VI to trade, do business (with one another); to trade, do business (مع with) VIII to work, be active, operate X to apply (ھ s.th.), use, employ (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to put into operation, operate, run ( ھ s.th.); to place s.o. (ه) at the head of s.th. (على), install, instate (ه على s.o. over) │ القسوة وسائل معه استعمل (wasā’il l-qaswa) he brought severe measures to bear upon him
عمل ‘amal doing, acting, action, activity; work, labor; course of action, way of acting, practice; achievement, accomplishment; activity (على for), work ( على in the service of s.th.); making, production, manufacture, fabrication; performance, execution; make, workmanship; practical work, practice; -- (pl. اعمال a‘māl) act, action; operation (mil.); work, job, chore, labor; deed, feat, achievement, exploit; occupation, business; trade, craft, handicraft; vicegerency, province, district; administrative district (e.g., Eg., Tun.);
ب العمل validity, effectiveness of s.th. (e.g., of an ordinance, and the like) │ العمل اجراء ب (ijrā’ al-‘a.) enforcement, implementation of s.th.; العمل ما what’s to be done now! what’s there to be done? what can you do? ب عمال (‘amalan) in execution of, in pursuance of, according to, pursuant to, is stipulated by; حربية اعمال (ḥarbīya) belligerent, or warlike, acts, military operations; األربعة األعمال(arba‘a) the first four rules of arithmetic; اعمال منزلية (manzilīya) household chores, household work; يدوية اعمال (yadawīya) handiwork(s), manual work; العمل صاحب employer
 عملي ‘amalī work-, working- (in compounds); serving practical purposes, practical; applied; عمليا ‘amalīyan practically, in practice │ العملية الحياة practical life, workaday life, professional life; العملي المذھب (madhab) pragmatism; العملية السياسة practical policy, “Realpolitik”
عملية ‘amalīya pl. -āt work, job; action, activity; making, manufacture, fabrication, production; procedure, method, technique; operation (as an action done as part of practical work; med.; mil.); process │ قيصرية عملية (qaiṣarīya) Caesarean section
عملة ‘amla evil deed │ بعملة in the very act, red-handedly, flagrante delicto
عملة ‘umla wages, pay; currency; current money, currency in circulation; money │ زائفة عملة counterfeit money; عملة سھلة (sahla) soft currency; صعبة عملة (ṣa‘ba) hard currency; العملة مزيف muzayyif al-‘u. counterfeiter; العملة تھريب currency smuggling
عميل ‘amīl pl. عمالء ‘umalā’  (business) representative; agent (also pol.); commission merchant (com.); customer, patron; patient; client
عمي ‘amīla woman customer, woman client
O عميلة ‘umaila pl. -āt erg (unit of energy or work; phys.)
عمالة ‘amāla pl. -āt wages, pay; brokerage, commission; department, district, province; (Alg.) prefecture, administrative district 645
عمولة ‘amūla brokerage, commission
عمالي ‘ummālī labor, workers’ (in compounds) │ عمالية صحيفة labor organ, labor (news)paper
معمل ma‘mal pl. معامل ma‘āmil  factory, mill; workshop, plant, works, establishment; institute; laboratory; pl. معامل industrial plant │ البحث معمل ma‘mal al-baḥt research institute; التكرير معمل refinery; اللبن معمل m. al-laban dairy
معاملة mu‘āmala pl. -āt treatment; procedure; social intercourse, social life, association (with one another); behavior, conduct (toward others); business; transaction; (esp. in pl.) mutual relations,
business relations; pl. معامالت handling (of freight, luggage, etc.) │ بالمثل المعاملة (mitl) reciprocity (in international trade); شرط رعاية األكثر الدول معاملة m. id-duwali l- akaṭari ri‘āyatan most-favored nation clause (dipl.)
تعمل ta‘ammul affectedness, affectation, finicality, mannerism
تعامل ta‘āmul commercial intercourse, trade relations, trade, dealings, transactions; business transactions (stock exchange); (pl. -āt) O reaction (chem..)
استعمال isti‘māl application, use, employment; utilization, exploitation; operation, handling (e.g., of a machine) │ االستعمال سھل sahl al-ist. easy to handle; سوء االسعتمال sū’ al-ist. abuse, misuse; شائع االستعمال in general use, commonly used, generally accepted; استعماله اساء asā’a sti‘mālahū to abuse, misuse, misemploy s.th.
عامل ‘āmil active; effective; -- (pl. عوامل ‘awāmil ) factor, constituent, element, (causative) agent, motive power; word governing another in syntactical regimen, regent (gram.); -- (pl. عمال ‘ummāl) maker, producer, manufacturer; doer, perpetrator, author; worker, workman, workingman, laborer; wage earner, employee; governor, vicegerent, lieutenant; administrative officer at the head of a ‘amal (Tun.); (Alg.) district president, prefect (of a ‘amala) │ العامل الجيش (jail) the regular, or active, army; الغضب عامل تحت (‘a. il-gadab) in wrathful agitation, infuriated; العمال حزب ḥizb al-‘u. labor party (specif., the Brit.
Labour Party); عامل عضو (‘uḍw) active member
به معمول ma‘mūl bihī in force, effective, valid; in use, applied
المعاميل al-ma‘āmīl the coffee implements (Bedouin)
معامل mu‘āmil O coefficient (math.)
مستعمل musta‘mil user
مستعمل musta‘mal employed, used also
= not new, secondhand); in use applied
عمالق ‘imlāq pl. عمالقة ‘amāliqa Amalekite; gigantic, giant, huge; a giant │ البحار عمالقة huge ocean liners
   عمن ‘ammān = من عن ‘an man
  عمان ‘umān Oman, sultanate in SE Arabia
عماني ‘umānī Omani, Oman (adj.)
  عمان ‘ammān  Amman (the ancient Philadelphia, capital city of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan)
عمه ‘amiha a (‘amah) to wander about, stray, rove; to stray (عن from)
عمي ‘amiya a (‘aman) to be or become blind, lose one’s eyesight; to be blind (عن to s.th.); to be obscure (على to s.o.) II to blind, render blind (ه s.o.); to blindfold (ه s.o.); to obscure, render cryptic, enigmatic or mysterious, mystify (ھ s.th.) IV to blind, render blind (ه s.o.); to blindfold (ه s.o.); to make (ه s.o.) blind (عن to a fact) V to be or become 646 blind, lose one’s eyesight VI to shut one’s eyes (عن on s.th.), pretend not to see (عن s.th.); to be blind (عن to)
عمى ‘aman blindness
عمية ‘amīya ignorance, folly عماء ‘amā’ heavy clouds عماية ‘amāya ignorance, folly
عمي pl. ‘amyā’ , عمياء f. a‘mā, اعمى
‘umy or عميان ‘umyān blind
معماة ma‘māh pl. معام ma‘āmin roadless desert, roadless area
تعام ta‘āmin blindness, (state of) delusion
معميات pl. mu‘amman معمى
mu‘ammayāt riddle, puzzle
 عن ‘an (prep.) off, away from; from (designating the source); out of (a feeling); about, on (a topic); according to, as attested or declared by, from what ... says, on the authority of; on the basis of, on the strength of; for, in defense of; as a substitute for; (as to syntactical regimen see under respective verb) │ يمينه عن (yamīnihī) to (or at) his or its right, at (or on) his or its right side, to the right of him or it; البحر سطح عن قدم الف ارتفاع على (alfi qadamin, saṭḥI l-baḥr) 1000 feet above see level; طريق عن (ṭarīqi) by way of, via; by means of, through; عني اليك ilaika ‘annī away from me! امره عن (amrihī) by s.o.’s
order(s). at s.o.’s instigation, on s.o.’s initiative; بصيرة عن consciously, fully aware of the situation; نية حسن عن (ḥusni nīya) in good faith, bona fide; حق عن (ḥaqq) justly, rightly, by rights; حوف عن (kauf) for fear; علم عن دراية، عن (‘ilm) on the basis of sound knowledge, in full cognizance of the situation; سرور عن gladly, happily, joyfully; وجدانية قناعة عن (qanā‘atin wijdānīya) out of absolute inner conviction; قريب عن or عن قريب، عما قليل or قليل عما (‘ammā) shortly, presently, after a (little) while, soon; فالن وساطة عن through the good offices of ...; يوم عن يوما (yauman) day after day, from day to day; آخرھم عن قتلوا (qutilū) they were killed to the last man; سنة ثمانين عن مات (tamānīna sanataan) he died at the age of eighty; مات كبيرة تركة عن (tarika) he died leaving a large fortune
  عن ‘anna i u (‘ann, عنن ‘anan) to present itself, offer itself (ل to s.o.); to take shape, to form, arise, spring up (ل in s.o.’s mind), suggest itself (ل to s.o.; of an opinion); to appear (ل to, before) │ ان له عن it occurred to him that ...
عنة ‘unna impotence (of the male)
عنان ‘anān (coll.; n. un. ة) clouds
عنان ‘inān pl. اعنة a‘inna rein(s); bridle
│ العنان له اطلق (aṭlaqa, ‘inān) to give free rein to s.o. or s.th., give vent to s.th.; جرت اعنتھا في األمور (jarat, a‘innatihā) things took a normal course, developed as scheduled
عنين ‘anīn impotent (male)
عنب ‘inab (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. اعناب a‘nāb grape(s) │ الذئب عنب ‘i. ad-di’b black nightshade (Solanum nigrum; bot.)
عناب ‘unnāb (coll.; n. un. ة) jujube (Zizyphus vulgaris Lam.; bot.); (its fruit) jujube
عنبر ‘anbar ambergris; (pl. عنابر
‘anābir ) sperm whale, cachalot (zool.)
عنبري ‘anbarī perfumed with ambergris; liqueur (also عنبري نبيذ); a variety of pigeon
الشتاء عنبرة ‘anbarat aš-šitā’ the severity of winter
  عنبر ‘anbar pl. عنابر ‘anābir  storehouse, magazine, depot, warehouse; factory hall; hold (of a ship); ward. section (of a hospital); quarters (of a ship’s crew); barrack(s) 647
عنت ‘anita a (‘anat) to fall on evil days, come to grief, meet with hardship, be in distress, suffer adversity; to commit a sin, specif., commit fornication II to force s.o. (ه) to perform a difficult task IV to distress, afflict, harass (ه s.o.), bring hardship (ه upon s.o.); to treat s.o. (ه) harshly, deal with s.o. (ه) roughly V to cause vexation, annoyance or distress (ه to s.o.), bring trouble (ه upon s.o.), harass, pre molest (ه s.o.); to seek to confuse s.o. (ه) with questions; to pick a quarrel, be out for a fight (مع with s.o.); to stickle, be pigheaded, insist stubbornly
عنت ‘anal distress, affliction, hardship, misery, adversity; pains, trouble, inconvenience; constraint, coercion
اعنات i‘nāt torment, harassment, molestation, chicanery, constraint, coercion
تعنت ta‘annut obstinacy, obduracy, pigheadedness, stubborn zeal, stickling
متعنت muta‘annit obstinate, obdurate, pigheaded, stubborn
عنتر ‘antara to display heroism
عنتر ‘antar Antar (the hero of a well- known romance of chivalry)
عنترى ‘antarī pl. -īya popular reciter of the Antar romance
‘anātira عناترة pl. ‘antarī عنترى
brassiere; bodice, corsage
عنترية ‘antarīya Antar, the romance of Antar, cycle of stories relating the deeds of Antar
عنجھية ‘unjuhīya haughtiness, self-importance, pride
عند ‘anada u i (عنود ‘unūd), ‘anida a (‘anad) and ‘anuda u to swerve, deviate, diverge, depart (عن from); to resist stubbornly; to be headstrong, obstinate, stubborn III to resist or oppose (ه s.o., doggedly), offer (stubborn) resistance (ه to s.o.) X to cling stubbornly (ه to s.th.)
عند ‘inda (prep.) at, near, by, with, on (of place, time and possession); upon; in the opinion of, in the view of; عند من min ‘indi from; from the home of; away from; عنده من in his turn, for his part; شيئا اضاف عنده من he added s.th. of his own; عندھا then, at that moment, with these words; عندي على (‘indī) against me; البيت عند (bait) near the house, at the house; التحقيق عند to be exact …, strictly speaking …; طلوع عند الشمس (ṭ. iš-šams) at sunrise; واحد دينار عندي (‘indī dīnār) I have only one dinar (with me); ذلك عند then, thereupon, at that moment; تراب ﷲ عند األرض ملوك (m. ul-arḍ, turāb) the kings of this world are mere dust in comparison with God; عندي in my opinion, as I think; عندك ما what do you think? what is your opinion? رأيھم عند يكن لم (yakun, ra‘yihim) he was not what they had expected; ظنه حسن عند كان (ḥusni ẓannihī) to meet, or be up to, s.o.’s high expectation; به الظن حسن عند كان (ḥusni ẓ- ẓanni) to have a good opinion of s.o.; كان نصحه عند (nuṣḥihī) to follow s.o.’s advice
عندما ‘indamā as soon as, whenever; when, as
عندياته من min ‘indīyātihī sprung from his own mind, his own brain child; of one’s own accord, on one’s own initiative
عندئذ ‘inda’idin then, at that time; at that moment, thereupon, then; with that, thereby
عنيد ‘anīd pl. عند ‘unud resisting stubbornly (ل s.o., s.th.); stubborn, obstinate, obdurate, pigheaded, headstrong, opinionated, willful, pertinacious
عناد ‘inād resistance, opposition; stubbornness, obstinacy, obduracy, pigheadedness, headstrongness, opinionatedness, willfulness, pertinacity 648
معاندة mu‘ānada resistance, opposition; stubbornness, obstinacy, obduracy, pigheadedness, headstrongness, opinionatedness, willfulness, pertinacity
معاند mu‘ānid resisting stubbornly (ل s.o., s.th.); stubborn, obstinate, obdurate, pigheaded, headstrong, opinionated, willful, pertinacious
 عندلة ‘andala song of the nightingale
عندليب ‘andalīb pl. عنادل ‘anādil  nightingale
عندم ‘andam brazilwood, sapanwood (used for dyeing); red dyestuff
عندم ‘andamī deep-red
‘ināz عناز ‘unūz, عنوز a‘nuz, اعنز pl. ‘anz عنز
goat
عنزة ‘anza (n. un.) pl. -āt goat
عنزة ‘anaza a short spear, iron-tipped at its lower end
عانس ‘ānis pl. عوانس ‘awānis spinster, old maid
عنصر ‘unṣur pl. عناصر ‘anāṣir  origin; race, stock, breed; ethnic element; element (chem., pol.); component, constituent, ingredient; pl. also: nationalities
عنصري ‘unṣurī race, racial; ethnic; elemental, of or pertaining to the elements
األحقاد or (tabāguḍ) التباغض العنصري │ المسألة العنصرية  hatred race العنصرية the problem, nationality the (mas’ala) minorities ethnic of problem
عنصر ‘unṣurīya race, nationality; racial theory
العنصرة al-‘anṣara Whitsuntide; Whitsunday, Pentecost (Chr.) │ العنصرة عيد īd al-‘a. Whitsuntide, Pentecost (Chr.); Shabuoth, Feast of Weeks, Pentecost (Jud.)
عنصل ‘unṣul pl. عناصل ‘anāṣil  squill, sea onion
عنعنات ‘an‘anāt (pl.) traditions
معنعن mu‘an‘an transmitted, handed down
عنف II to treat severely, harshly, with rigor (ب or على or ه s.o.), deal with s.o. (ب or على or ه) roughly; to reprimand, rebuke, censure sharply, berate, chide, scold (ب or ه s.o.) IV to treat severely, harshly, with rigor (ه s.o.), deal with s.o. (ه) roughly
عنف ‘unf, ‘anf sternness, severity, rigor; harshness; bluntness, gruffness; ruggedness, roughness; violence, vehemence; fierceness, bitterness, embitterment, toughness; use of force
عنيف ‘anīf stern, severe, drastic, rigorous; harsh, hard; ungentle, rough,
rude; blunt, gruff; rugged, rough; violent, vehement; fierce, embittered, tough; strenuous, exacting, difficult (e.g., reading)
عنفوان ‘unfuwān vigor, prime, bloom │ شبابه عنفوان في (‘u. šabābihī) in the prime of his youth
اعنف a‘naf  sterner, severer, harsher, harder, fiercer
تعنيف ta‘nīf stern censure, reprimand, rebuke
عنق II to grab by the neck, to collar (ه s.o.) III to embrace, hug (ه s.o.); to associate closely (ه with), attach o.s. closely (ه to) VI to embrace each other VIII to embrace, hug (ه s.o.); to adopt, embrace (ھ s.th., esp. a religion or doctrine), be converted ( ھ to s.th.), take up (ھ s.th.); to combine (ھ with s.th.; chem.); to embrace each other
عنق unuq, unq pl. اعناق a‘nāq neck, nape
عناق ‘anāq pl. اعنق a‘nuq, عنوق ‘unūq she-kid, young she-goat │ األرض عناق ‘a. al-arḍ caracal, desert lynx (Lynx caracal; zool.) 649
عنقاء ‘anqā’  a legendary bird, griffon
عناق ‘ināq embrace, hug, accolade
معانقة mu‘ānaqa embrace, hug, accolade
اعتناق i‘tināq embracement (of a religion or doctrine), adoption, acceptance (of a doctrine)
عنقود ‘unqūd pl. عناقيد ‘anāqīd  cluster, bunch; bunch of grapes
عنقاش ‘inqāš peddler, hawker
بيت │ spider ‘anākib  عناكب pl. ‘ankabūt عنكبوت spider cobweb, al-‘a. bait )نسيج( العنكبوت web
عنو) عنا) ‘anā u (‘unūw) to be humble, submissive, subservient, servile (ل toward, before), be obedient, yield, submit (ل to s.o.), obey (ل s.o.); -- u (عنوة ‘anwa) to take by force (ھ s.th.); -- u to be on s.o.’s ( ه) mind, disquiet, discomfort, worry, preoccupy (ه s.o.); to concern, affect, regard, interest (ه s.o.)
 عنوة ‘anwa force, compulsion; forcibleness, violence; ‘anwatan forcibly, by force
عنى see معنوي
عان ‘ānin humble, subservient, submissive, servile, obedient; captive; miserable, distressed, in trouble
عنون ‘anwana to furnish with an address or title, entitle, address (ھ s.th.)
عنوان ‘unwān pl. عناوين ‘anāwīn  address; title, heading; model, epitome; sign, token │ على or ل عنوانا in token of s.th., as a sign of s.th.
معنون mu‘anwan addressed (الى to), inscribed; entitled (ب as)
عنى ‘anī i (عناية ‘ināya) to be on s.o.’s (ه) mind; to disquiet, discomfort, worry, preoccupy (ه s.o.); to concern, affect, regard, interest (ه s.o.); -- ‘aniya a (عناء ‘anā’) to be worried, concerned, anxious; to toil, labor, drudge; -- ‘anī i (‘any) to have in mind (ھ s.th.), mean (ه ھ، ب s.o., s.th. by); يعني ya‘nī or اعني a‘nī that is, i.e.; -- pass. ‘uniya (عناية ‘ināya) to worry, be concerned (ب about), take an interest (ب in); to take care (ب of), see (ب to) II to torment, agonize, distress, harass, (ه s.o.) III to be preoccupied (ھ with s.th.); to take pains (ھ with s.th., in doing s.th.), spend effort (ھ on s.th.); to see to it, make efforts, bear in mind, make sure (ان that); to undergo, incur, endure, suffer, sustain, bear (ھ s.th.); to suffer (ھ from), be afflicted (ھ with) V to toil, labor. drudge VIII to be solicitous (ب about, for, of), go to trouble (ب for), be concerned, anxious ( ب about), feel concern (ب for); to take care (ب of), care. provide (ب for), look (ب after), see (ب to), tend (ب s.th.), put one’s mind, devote one’s attention (ب to); to attend (ب to), nurse (ب s.o., s.th., e.g., a patient)
عناء ‘anā’ pains, trouble, toil, hardship, difficulty, distress
عناية ināya concern; care, solicitude, providence (ب for); care(fulness), painstaking, meticulousness (ب in); heed, notice, regard, attention (ب to); interest (ب in) │ اإللھية العناية (ilāhīya) divine
providence; طبية عناية (ṭibbīya) medical care
معنى ma‘nan pl. معان ma‘ānin sense, meaning, signification, import; concept, notion, idea, thought; thematic purport (e.g., of a work of art, as distinguiohed from its form); a rhetorical, figurative, or allegorical expression; المعاني the good qualities (of a person) │ معنى اسم ism ma‘nā abstract noun (gram.); المعاني علم ‘ilm al-m. rhetoric; معنى ذو significant, meaningful, telling, tell-tale; الكلمة معنى بكل bi-kull m. l-kalima in the full sense of the word; ٠٥٦ له معنى ال (ma‘nā) meaningless, without meaning; معناه في وما and the like; معان كلھا نظرات (naẓarāt kulluhā) telling glances, glances full of meaning
معنوى ma‘nawī relating to the sense or import (of a word or expression; as opposed to لفظي lafẓī); semantic, significative, of or pertaining to meaning; ideal, ideational, ideative; abstract; mental; spiritual (as opposed to material)
│ معنوى شخص (šakṣ) artificial, conventional, or juristic, person, a body corporate as a subject of rights and duties
معنوبات ma‘nawīyāt ideal, immaterial thing.; morale, spirit (of an army)
معاناة mu‘ānāh effort(s)
تعن ta‘annin pains, trouble, toil, drudgery
اعتناء i‘tinā’ providing, solicitude, concern (ب for), attendance (ب to), maintenance, nursing, cultivation (ب of), care (ب of, for), carefulness, painstaking ( ب in); attention (ب to), interest (ب in)
عان ‘ānin miserable, distressed, in trouble
معني ma‘nīy concerned, affected; interested (ب in)
معنى mu‘annan (syr.) unmetrical poem with end rhyme
معتن mu‘tanin concerned, solicitous, careful, heedful, mindful, thoughtful, attentive
عھد ‘ahida a (‘ahd) to know (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.; ھ
s.th., e.g., a quality, a trait, ب of
 s.o.), be acquainted, familiar (ه ھ، with); to observe closely, heed (ھ s.th.), adhere (ھ to s.th.); to attend (ھ to), look after s.th. (ھ); to delegate, entrust, assign, commit (الى ب to s.o., s.th.), vest (الى ب in
s.o. s.th.), communion, charge, authorize, empower. entrust (الى ب s.o. with, or s.o. with the task of ...); to impose, enjoin (ب الى on s.o s.th., or on s.o. the obligation to ...), obligate, commit (الى ب s.o. to do s.th.) │ اعھد فيما (a‘hadu) to my knowledge, as far as I know; ووعد عھد (wa‘dahū) to fulfill, or keep, one’s promise III to make a contract, compact, or covenant (ه على with s.o. concerning);
to promise (ه على to s.o. s.th. also ب s.th.); to engage, undertake, bind o.s. pledge o.s. commit o.s. obligate o.s. (ه على to s.o. to do s.th.) V to advocate, support (s.th.), stand up (ھ for s.th.); to observe, heed, keep in mind (ھ s.th.), pay attention, see, attend (ھ to s.th.), take care (ھ of s.th.); to care (ھ for s.th.), maintain, keep up, service (ھ s.h.); to be liable for the maintenance or upkeep (ھ of s.th.); to assume. take upon o.s. (ب s.th.); to engage, undertake, bind o.s. pledge o.s., commit o.s. obligate o.s. (ل ب to s.o. to do s.th., also على ان to do s.th.); to promise (ب ل to s.o. s.th.) X to exact a written pledge or commitment (من from s.o.); to have s.o. (من) sign a contract
عھد ‘ahd knowledge; acquaintance, contact (ب with); the well-known, familiar nature (of s.o.); close observance, strict adherence (to), keeping, fulfillment (of a promise); delegation, assignment, committing (ب الى of s.th. to s.o.), vesting (الى ب in s.o. of s.th.), commissioning, charging, entrusting (الى ب of s.o. with s.th.); commission; -- (pl. عھود ‘uhūd) commitment, obligation, liability; responsibility; pledge, vow; promise; oath; contract, compact, covenant, pact, treaty, agreement; time, epoch, era │ بعد العھد bu‘d al-‘a. the fact that s.th. is long pact, that s.th. belong, to the remote past; العھد حديث recent, late, new, young; قريب العھد do.; العھد حديث or ب عھد حديث (ḥ. ‘ahdin) having adopted or acquired 651 (s.th.) recently; not long accustomed to (s.th.), inexperienced at (s.th.), new at (s.th.), newly, e.g., بعرس عھد حديث
(bi-‘ursin) newly wed, بالوالدة العھد حديث newborn; بأوربا عھد حديث كان he had not known Europe until recently; العھد قديم of an early date, long past, long-standing; قديم ب العھد of long experience in, long acquainted with; ب عھد قريب (q. ‘ahdin),
ب؛ العھد حديث ب، عھد حديث = ب العھد قريب بالفطام عھد قريب (fiṭām) just weaned. newly weaned; ...-I,} ¥ <J- for a abort time (past), of late; recent, late; recently, lately, the other day; بعيد عھد منذ a long time ago; له عھد ال (‘ahda) not to know s.th.; not having experienced s.th., being unacquainted with ...; المسألة بھذه عھدنا (‘ahdunā, mas’ala) our long-standing knowledge of this question; عليه عھدا اخذ to exact a promise from s.o., pledge s.o.; قطع عھدا to conclude a treaty, make a contract; to make a promise; على عھدا نفسه قطع to assume an obligation, commit o.s. obligate
o.s. pledge o.s.; to vow, make a vow (ب to do s.th.); األمان عھد ‘a. al-amān (formerly:) an order bestowed by the Bey of Tunis; المرصع األمان عھد (muraṣṣa‘) a higher class of the afore-mentioned order; الجديد العھد the New Testament; القديم العھد the Old Testament; العھد ولي walīy al-‘a. heir- apparent, crown prince; عھده على at or in his time; فالن عھد في during s.o.’s lifetime; in s.o.’s epoch; عھده his familiar nature or manner, his nature as it had always been known; كعھده ظل (ẓalla) he remained as he had always been, as everybody used to know him; عھدھم the nature or manner that they know (knew) of him (or of it), that they are
(were) used to; به كعھدھم such as they used to know him; بك كعھدي انت زلت ما yon are still the same! عھده على زال ما to be unchanged, be as always; العھد به طال (‘ahdu) to last, or have lasted, a long time
عھدة ‘uhda contractual obligation (Isl.
Law); responsibility; charge, custody, guardianship; guaranty │ عھدته في in his care, custody, or charge, entrusted to him; له عھدته (‘uhdatuhū) he is responsible for it
عھيد ‘ahīd ally, confederate
معھد ma‘had pl. معاھد ma‘āhid  place, locality (which one had known before or which one revisits); public institute or institution; (scientific) institute; seminar │ الذكريات معاھد m. ad-dikrayāt places fraught
 with memories; اصالحي معھد (iṣlāḥī) reformatory
معاھدة mu‘āhada pl. -āt agreement, arrangement, accord.; alliance, treaty, pact
(aṣ-ṣulḥ) as-salām m. )معاھدة السالم )الصلح │ al- ‘adam m. معاھدة عدم االعتداء treaty; peace pact nonaggression i‘tidā’
تعھد ta‘ahhud advocacy, support; care; charge, custody, guardianship, tutelage (with foll. genit.: over); care, maintenance, servicing, upkeep; assumption, undertaking (ب of s.th.); (pl.
-āt) promise, pledge, commitment, engagement, obligation, liability, contractual duty
معھود ma‘hūd well-known; المعھود the said ..., the … in question
متعھد muta‘ahhid pl. -ūn contractor, entrepreneur; concessionaire │ فني متعھد (fannī) impresario
متعاھد muta‘āhid: المتعاھدان the two contracting parties
عھر ‘ahara a (‘ahr, ‘ihr) and ‘ahira a (‘ahar) to commit adultery, whore (اليھا with a woman) III = I (ھا with a woman)
عھر ‘ihr adultery, fornication, whoredom; prostitution
عھر ‘ahr adulterer, whoremonger, fornicator
عھارة ‘ahāra adultery, fornication, whoredom; prostitution 652
عاھر ‘āhir committing adultery, fornicating, whoring; (pl. عھار ‘uhhār) adulterer, fornicator, whoremonger; -- (pl. عواھر ‘awahir ) adulteress; whore, harlot, prostitute
عاھرة ‘āhira pl. -āt, عواھر ‘awāhir 
adulteress; whore, harlot, prostitute
عاھل ‘āhil pl. عواھل ‘awāhil  sovereign, prince, ruler, monarch
عھن ‘ihn (colored) wool
عواھن ‘awāhin  (pl. of عاھن ‘āhin) limbs, extremities (of the body); palm branches │ عواھنه على الكالم (رمى) القى (alqā, kalāma) to talk without restraint, ramble
عوج ‘awija a (‘awaj) to be crooked, curved, twisted, tortuous, bent, bowed,
stooping; to bend, twist, curve; -- عاج ‘āja u to turn off the road (while traveling); to stop (over). put up (على at, in) II to bend, crook, curve, twist (ھ s.th.) V and IX = I
عوج ‘iwaj, ‘awaj crookedness, twistedness, curvature, bend(ing), tortuosity; unevenness; deviation (from that which is right)
عاج ‘āj ivory
عاجي ‘ājī ivory (adj.)
اعوج a‘waj , f. عوجاء ‘aujā’ , pl. (عوج ‘ūj crooked, curved, bent, twisted, tortuous, sinuous; stooping, bowed; wry; odd, queer
اععجاج i‘wijāj crookedness, twistedness, curvature, bend(ing), tortuosity; unevenness; deviation (from that which is right); crooked ways
معوجه mu‘awwaja pl. -āt retort (chem.)
معوج mu‘wajj crooked, curved, bent, twisted, tortuous, sinuous; stooping, bowed; wry; odd, queer
عود) عاد) ‘āda u (‘aud, عود ‘auda, معاد ma‘ād) to return, come back (ل or الى to); to flow back; to go back. be traceable, be attributable (الى to); to revert, redound, accrue (على to); to refer, relate (على to); to be due. go back (الى to); to fall to s.o.’s ( الى) lot or share, fall in s.o.’s ((الى bailiwick; to belong, (ap)pertain, be proper (الى or ل to); to give up, abandon, relinquish (عن s.th.), withdraw, resign (عن from); ب عاد to return with = to lead back, bring back, take back, return, reduce, revert s.o. or s.th. (الى to); ب عليه عاد to bring about, entail s.th. for s.o s. result in s.th. for s.o., yield, bring in, return s.th. to s.o.; (with predicate adjective or noun in acc.) to become, grow (into), turn into; (with foil. imparf. or الى) to resume, renew (an activity); (with neg. and foil. imparf.) to do s.th. no more or no longer; with foil. finite verb) to do s.th. again or anew; -- u ( عيادة ‘iyāda) to visit (ه a patient), have under treatment (ه s.o.; of a physician) │ نفسه الى عاد to regain consciousness, come to; to take counsel with o.s., hold self- communion, examine o.s. introspectively, search one’s soul; مجاريھا الى المياه عادت (majārīhā) the situation returned to
 normal; أمره رأس الى عاد ra’s amrihī) to start s.th. all over again; ادراجه عاد (adrājahū) to retrace one’s steps; to turn back, go back; عقبيه على عاد (‘aqbaihi), pl. اعقابھم على عادوا (a‘qābihim) do.; اعد  لم  صبرا استطيع lam a‘ud astatī‘u ṣabran I could not stand it any longer; طاقة لع يعد لم به (ya‘ud, ṭāqatun) he no longer had any power over it; سبيل اليه يعد لم there is no longer any possibility for it; يقول عاد he continued (after a pause in his speech) II to accustom, habituate, condition, inure, season (على or ه ھ s.o. to s.th.), make s.o. ( ه) get used (على or ھ to s.th.) III to return ( ه ھ، to s.o., to s.th.); to revert, come back, turn again, apply o.s. anew (ھ to s.th.), take up again, resume (٣٥٦ ھ s.th.); to befall again, seize again (ه s.o.), come again (ه over s.o.) IV to cause to return,
bring back, take back (الى ھ ه s.o., s.th. to); to return, give back, send back (ه الى، ھ s.o., s.th. to s.o.); to put back, lay back (ھ s.th., محله الى ilā maḥallihī in its place); to repeat (ھ على s.th., i.e., words, to s.o.); to reiterate, repeat, do again or anew, renew, resume (ھ s.th.); to re-establish, restore, repair (ھ s.th.); to restore (ھ ھ s.th. to), make s.th. (ھ) once more (ھ s.th.); to reinstate, reinstall (ھ s.o.) │ مسجد بناء اعاد (binā’a masjidin) to rebuild a mosque; اعاد ذكريات (dikrayāt) to revive, or reawaken, memories; الكتاب طبع اعاد (ṭab‘a l-k.) to reprint a book; ويبدأه القول يعيد (yu‘īdu, yabda’uhū) he keeps talking of it, he continue, to bring up the subject; النظر اعاد في (naẓara) to re-examine, reinvestigate, reconsider, check, verify, revise s.th., go over s.th. or into s.th. again; في النظر اعاد الدعوى (da‘wā) to retry the case (jur.) V to get used, be accustomed, habituate o.s. ( على or ھ to s.th.), make a habit (على or ھ of s.th.), be used to doing, be wont to do ( على or ھ s.th.) VIII = V; X to recall, call back (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to reclaim, demand back (ھ من s.th. from); to regain, recover, recuperate, reconquer, fetch back, get back, retrieve (ھ s.th.); to recall, recollect, call back to one’s mind (ھ s.th.); to ask
s.o. (ه) to repeat (ھ s.th.)
عود ‘ūd pl. اعواد a‘wād, عيدان ‘īdān wood; stick, rod, pole; branch, twig, switch; stem, stalk; cane, reed; aloes (wood); lute (musical instrument); body,
build, physique; strength, force, intensity; pl. اعواد full intensity (e.g., of a disease) │ الثقاب عود matchstick, match; الصليب عود peony (Paeonia; bot.); الكبريت عود ‘ūd al- kibrīt matchstick, match; العود رخاوة rakāwat al-‘ūd weakness of character; العود صلب ṣulb al-‘ūd of robust physique; strongly built, husky, sturdy; stubborn, resistant, unbending, unyielding, relentless; العود صالبة ṣalābat al-‘ūd sternness, severity, hardness, obstinacy, stubbornness, inflexibility, relentlessness; العود لدن ladn al-‘ūd lissome, lithe, of elastic physique; عوده ثقف (taqqafa) to train, educate s.o.; عوده عجم (‘ūdahū) to test s.o., put s.o. to the test; عوده كسر (‘ūdahū) to break s.o.’s power of resistance, crush s.o.’s spirit
عود ‘aud return; reversion; recurrence; recidivism (jur.); repetition, reiteration │ وبدءا عودا فعله fa'alahū ‘audan wa bad’an or بدئه على عوده فعله (‘audahū) or الى عودا فعله  بدء he did or started it all over again
عودة ‘auda return │ البريد بعودة by return mail; عودة غير الى never to return again, gone forever; good riddance! farewell forever!
عادة ‘āda pl. -āt, عوائد ‘awā’id  habit, wont, custom, usage, practice; ‘ādatan usually, customarily, ordinarily, habitually; pl. عوائد taxes, duties; charges, fees, rates │ العادة فوق extraordinary, unusual, uncommon; special, extraordinary, emergency (e.g., meeting); عادته على according to his habit, as was his wont, as he used to do; العادة كسابق ka- sābiqi l-‘ā. as was formerly customary, as usual; ب العادة جرت (jarat il-‘ādatu) to be customary, usual, common or current, prevail, be a common phenomenon, be the vogue, have become common practice; عادتھم به جرت that was their habit, that’s what they used to do; السرية العادة (sirrīya) onanism, masturbation; الجمرك عوائد ‘a. al- gumruk customs duties; مبان عوائد ‘a. mabānin house taxes; األمالك عوائد taxes on real state
عادي ‘ādī customary, usual, common, ordinary, normal, regular; undistinguished, run-of-the-mill; ordinary, regular (e.g., 654 meeting, as opposed to extraordinary, special, emergency);
 simple, plain, ordinary (man); old, ancient, antique; عاديات ‘ādīyāt antiques, antiquities
عياد ‘iyād repetition, reiteration, recurrence
عيادة ‘iyāda visit (with a patient), doctor’s call (on a patient); -- (pl. -āt) clinic; office (of a physician), consultation room (of a physician) │ خارجية عيادة (kārijīya) policlinic; outpatient clinic
عوادة ‘awāda pl. -āt woman lutist
معاد ma‘ād return; place to which one returns; (place of) destination; المعاد the hereafter, the life to come │ والمعاد المبدأ (mabda’) the crux, (of a matter), the all- important factor (of s.th.)
تعويد ta‘wīd accustoming, habituation, conditioning, inurement (على to)
اعادة i‘āda giving back, handing back, sending back, return(ing); reinstatement, reinstallment; repetition, reiteration; resumption; re-establishment, restoration, repair │ البناء اعاد reconstruction; اعادة الحقوق rehabilitation; التسلح اعادة i. at- tasalluḥ rearmament; ما على الشؤون اعادة  عليه كانت restoration of the status quo ante; التكوين اعادة re-formation; في النظر اعادة (i. an-naẓar) re-examination, reinvestigation,
reconsideration, revision of s.th.; النظر اعادة دعوى في (da‘wa) retrial of a case (jur.); التنظيم اعادة reorganization
تعود ta‘awwud contraction of a habit, habituation
اعتياد i‘tiyād oontraotion of a habit, habituation
اعتيادي i‘tiyādī ordinary, common; usual, customary, habitual; normal, regular; plain, simple, ordinary (man)
استعادة isti‘āda reconquest, recovery, recuperation, regaining, reclamation, retrieval
عائد ‘ā’id returning, reverting, recurrent; accruing (profit, merit); belonging, (ap)pertaining, proper (ل or الى to s.o., to s.th.); (pl. -ūn) returning emigrant, re-emigrant; (pl. عواد ‘uwwād) visitor (to a sick person); pl. عائدات revenues │ األرباح عائد net profit, net gain
عائدة ‘ā’ida pl. عوائد ‘awā’d  benefit, profit, advantage, gain (على for s.o.)
عائدية ‘ā’idīya a belonging (to), a being part (of), membership
معود mu‘awwad used, accustomed, habituated, conditioned, inured, seasoned (على to); wont (على to do s.th.), being in the habit (على of doing s.th.)
معيد mu‘īd pl. -ūn repetitor, tutor, coach; assistant conducting drill sessions (university)
معاد ma‘ād: تصديره معاد (taṣdīruhū) forwarded (mail)
متعود muta‘awwid used, accustomed, habituated, conditioned, inured, seasoned (على to); wont (على to do s.th.), being in the habit (على of doing s.th.)
معتاد mu‘tād used, accustomed, habituated, conditioned, inured, seasoned, (على to); wont (على to do s.th.), being in the habit (على of doing s.th.); usual, customary, normal │ كالمعتاد as usual; معتاد الجرائم habitual criminal
عوذ) عاذ) ‘āda u (‘aud, عياذ ‘iyād, معاذ ma‘ād) to seek the protection (ب من of s.o. from or against), take refuge (ب من with s.o. from)
│ <Iبا اعوذ a‘ūdu bi-llāh God forbid! God save me from that! II to protect (ه من s.o. from or against, by placing him under the wing ب of s.o. else); to pronounce a charm or incantation (ه over s.o.); to fortify (ه s.o.) with a charm, incantation or amulet IV = II; to place s.o. (ه) under God’s protection, pray to God that he guard s.o. ( ه) against s.th. 655 V = I; X = I; to protect o.s., make o.s. proof (ب by means of)
عوذ ‘aud (act of) taking refuge
عوذ ‘awad refuge, place of refuge, retreat, asylum, sanctuary
عوذة ‘ūda pl. عوذ ‘uwad amulet, talisman; charm, spell, incantation
عياذ ‘iyād (act or instance of) taking refuge │ ﷲ عياذ ‘iyāda llāh or <Iبا العياذ (‘iyāda) God forbid! God save (protect) me (us) from that!
معاذ ma‘ād (act or instance of) taking refuge; refuge, place of refuge, retreat, asylum, sanctuary │ ﷲ معاذ ma‘āda llāh(i)
 God forbid! God save (protect) me (us) from that!
تعويذ ta‘wīd pl. تعتويذ ta‘āwīd  amulet, talisman; charm, spell, incantation
عور ‘awira a (‘awar) to lose an eye, be or become one-eyed II to deprive of one eye, make blind in one, eye (ه s.o.); to damage, mar, spoil (ھ s.th.); to gauge (ھ measures, weights), test the accuracy (ھ of measures, of weights) IV to lend, loan (ه ھ to s.o. s.th.) VI to alternate, take turns (ھ in s.th.), do by turns, take alternately (ھ s.th.): to seize, grip, befall, overcome, (alternately, successively) (ه s.o., ھ s.th.) VIII اعتور i‘tawara to befall, affect (alternately, successively) (ه s.o.), come (alternately, successively) (ه over s.o.); to shape, mold, form (ھ s.th., said of heterogeneous influences or factors); to stand in the way of (ھ), hinder (ھ s.th.) X to borrow (ھ من s.th. from)
عورة ‘aura defectiveness, faultiness, deficiency, imperfection; -- (pl. -āt) pudendum, genitals; weakness, weak spot
عوار ‘awār, ‘iwār fault, blemish, defect, flaw, imperfection
عوار ‘uwwār a variety of swallow
عير ‘īra (eg.) false, artificial (teeth, hair)
اعور a‘war , f. عوراء ‘aurā’ , pl. عور ‘ūr one-eyed │ األعور المعي (ma‘y) caecum, blind gut
اعارة i‘āra lending
اعاري i‘ārī: اعارية مكتبة (maktaba) lending library, circulating library
تعاور ta‘āwur alternation, variation, fluctuation
استعارة isti‘āra borrowing; metaphor استعاري isti‘ārī metaphorical, figurative عارية ‘āriya or ‘ārīya pl. عور ‘awārin
s.th. borrowed, borrowing; loan
معير mu‘īr lender
معار mu‘ār lent, loaned
مستعير musta‘īr borrower
مستعار musta‘ār borrowed; used metaphorically or figuratively; false,
artificial (e.g., hair) │ مستعار اسم (ism) pseudonym; مستعار وجوه masked faces; hypocrites
عرى see ‘ārin عار 
عوز ‘awiza a (‘awaz) to be or become poor, needy, destitute; -- عاز ‘āza u (‘auz) to need, require (ھ s.th.), be in want or need (ھ of s.th.) IV اعوز a‘waza to be or become poor, needy, destitute │ اعوزه الشيء (šai’u) he lacked the thing, he needed it, he was in want of it
عوز ‘awaz lack, need, want, necessity, exigency; poverty, neediness, destitution, indigence, penury
عوز ‘awiz poor, needy, destitute, necessitous, indigent
عازة ‘āza lack, need, want, necessity, exigency; poverty, poorness
اعوز a‘waz  poor, needy, destitute, indigent, necessitous 656



غ

غاباني gābānī cashmere, a soft twilled fabric
غور see غار
غاز gāz pl. -āt gas; petroleum, oil (magr.) │ السامة الغازات (sāmma) the poison gases
مياه غازية │ gaslike gaseous, gāzī غازي
carbonated water, mineral water غازوزة (It. gasosa) gāzūza soda water  غال gāl pl. -āt padlock
 الغال al-gāl Gaul (country)
غالي gālī Gallic; (pl. -ūn) a Gaul
Ghana غانا gāna , غانة
 غب to attack every other day (ه على، s.o., of fever)
غب gibb end, outcome, upshot, issue, effect, result, consequence; gibba (prep.) after │ غبا زاره zarahū gibban to visit s.o. at intervals; الغب حمى ḥummā l-g. tertian fever
 غبب gabab pl. اغباب agbāb dewlap (of bovines), wattle
مغبة magabba pl. -āt end, outcome, upshot, issue, effect, result, consequence
  غبgabba u (= عب ‘abba u) to gulp down, pour down, toss down, drink avidly (ھ s.th.)
غبة gubba swallow, gulp, draught
غبر gabara u (غبور gubūr) to go by, elapse, pass; to be past, elapsed, bygone II to soil, or cover, with dust (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to raise dust │ وجھه في غبر (wajhihī) to surpass, outstrip, outdo s.o., be superior to
s.o. IV = II; V to be dust-covered, be or become dusty IX to be dust-colored
غبر gabir recrudescent, reopening (wound)
غبرة guhra dust color
غبرة gabara dust
غبار gubār dust; (pl. اغبرة agbira) dust cloud │ عليه غبار ال (gubāra) clear, plain, distinct; unobjectionable, incontestable; blameless, irreproachable, faultless, impeccable (morally); غباره شق ما mā šaqqa gubārahū he never quite attained his (another’s) eminence, he did not measure up to him; غباره يشق ال lā yušaqqu gubāruhū or غبار له يشق ال (yušaqqu) he is unsurpassable, he is unequaled; unsurpassable, unequaled, unrivaled, peerless, incomparable; غباره في جرى (jarā) to follow s.o. loyally
اغبر agbar , f. غبراء gabrā’ , pl. غبر gubr dust-colored; dust-covered, dusty; األغبر the earth, the ground; الغبراء the Earth
اغبرار igbirār grudge, rancor, resentment (على toward)
bygone, gawābir  غابر pl. gābir غابر or األزمان الغابرة │ past the elapsed; past, times ancient times, old القديم الغابر
غبش gabaš pl. اغباش agbāš darkness, dark, duskiness; the twilight before sunrise, last shadows of the night
غبش gabiš dark (night); opaque, not transparent
غبشة gabša twilight (of dawn)
غبش pl. gabšā’, غبشاء f.  , agbaš اغبش
gubš dark (night); opaque, not transparent
غباشة gabāša weakness of the eyes, asthenopia
غبط gabaṭa i (gabṭ) to envy (ه على s.o. s.th. or for s.th.); pass. gubiṭa to be happy II to make (ه s.o.) envious; to deem (ه s.o.) fortunate, call (ه s.o.) happy VIII to be 664 glad, be delighted, rejoice, exult, be jubilant (ب at, about), be elated (ب by); to be happy (ب about); to be pleased, be satisfied (ب with)
غبطة gabṭa state of happiness, happiness, exultation, delight, rapture, bliss, felicity; beatitude; title of the Patriarch (Copt.-Chr.) الغبطة صاحب do.; كان غبطة مكان (maḥalla g.) to be in an enviable position
اغتباط igtibāṭ joy, delight, rejoicing, exultation, triumph, jubilation; happiness, contentedness, satisfaction, gratification, pleasure
مغبوط magbūṭ in an enviable position, happy, lucky, fortunate; blessed, beatified, canonized (Chr.)
مغتبط mugtabiṭ glad, happy, delighted ( ب at), pleased, satisfied (ب with), gratified (ب by)
 غبن gabana i (gabn) to cheat, dupe, gull, defraud, overreach (ه في s.o. in), impose (في upon s.o. in)
غبن gabn, gubn pl. غبون gubūn fraud, deceit, imposture, swindle; defraudation, cheating, duping; damage, wrong, prejudice │ فاحش غبن criminal fraud (Isl. Law)
غبن gaban stupidity
تغابن tagābun mutual cheating │ يوم التغابن yaum at-t. the Day of Resurrection
مغبون magbūn deceived, defrauded, cheated, gulled, duped; prejudiced, wronged, injured │ المغبون بصفقة رجع or. عاد (bi-ṣafqati l-m.) to return empty-handed; to lose the game
  غباني gabānī and غاباني gābānī cashmere, a soft twilled fabric
(غبو and غبي) gahiya a (غباوة gabāwa) not to comprehend (عن or ھ s.th.), have no
 knowledge, be ignorant (عن or ھ of s.th.); to be unknown, unfamiliar (على to s.o.) VI to be unaware (عن of s.th.)
غبي gabīy pl. اغبياء agbiyā’  unwise, unjudicious, ignorant, foolish, stupid; dolt, numbskull, ignoramus
غباء gabā’ ignorance, foolishness, stupidity
غباوة gabāwa ignorance, foolishness, stupidity
غبوة gabwa riddle, puzzle
اغبى agbā stupider, more foolish, more simple-minded
غت gatta u (gatt) to press, choke, throttle (ه s.o.); to dip, plunge, immerse (ه ,ھ في s.o., s.th. in) │ الضحك غت (ḍaḥika) to suppress one’s laughter, bite one’s lip
غث gatta i a (غثاثة gatāta, غثوثة gutūta) to be or become lean, meager; -- gatta i (gatt, غثيث gatīt) to feater, suppurate, discharge pus (wound)
غث gatt lean, thin, scrawny; meager, scanty, poor, wretched
غثيث gatīt lean, thin, scrawny; pus, matter
غثاثة gatāta leanness, thinness, scrawniness
غثي gatā i to confuse, muddle, jumble, garble ( ھ s.th.); -- نفسه غثت gatat nafsuhū (gaty, غثيان gatayān) and نفسه غثيت (gatiyat) to feel like vomiting, feel sick, be indisposed
غثي gaty nausea, qualmishness, sickness; indisposition
غثيان gatayān nausea, qualmishness, sickness; indisposition
غثاء gutā’ scum
غجر (eg.) to scold, use abusive language, curse, swear
غجري gajarī pl. غجر gajar gipsy
تغجير tagjīr scolding, cursing, abusive language 665
غدو see غد
غدد gadad cattle epidemic
غدة gudda pl. غدد gudad gland │ الغدة الدرقية (daraqīya) thyroid gland; صماء غدة (ṣammā) endocrine (or ductless) gland; الصنوبرية الغدة (ṣanaubarīya) pineal gland; النكفية الغدة (nakfīya) parotid gland
غددي gudadī glandular
غدر gadara i u (gadr) to act treacherously, perfidiously (في or ب or ه toward s.o.), doublecross, deceive, betray, delude (ب or ه s.o.) III to leave (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.; ھ الى place for), depart (ھ الى from a place to)
غدر gadr perfidy, breach of faith, betrayal, treason, treachery
غدير gadīr pl. غدر gudur, غدران gudrān pond, pool, puddle; stream, brook, creek, river
غديرة gadīra pl. غدائر gadā’ir  queue, pigtail, braid, plait, tress (of hair)
غدار gaddār perfidious, disloyal, treacherous, traitorous; false, faithless, deceitful
غدارة gaddāra pl. -āt pistol │ سريعة غدارة الطلق (s. aṭ-ṭalq) submachine gun, Tommy gun
غادر gādir perfidious, disloyal, treacherous; false, faithless, deceitful
غدفة gudfa pl. غدف gudaf headcloth, kerchief
غداف gudaf raven
غدق gadiqa a (gadaq) to be copious, be heavy, pour down (rain) IV = I; to give bountifully (على to s.o.), shower, load (ھ على s.o. with s.th.), bestow liberally (على ھ upon s.o. s.th.)
غدق gadiq copious, abundant (water, rain)
مغدق mugdiq copious, abundant (water, rain)
غدن XII igdaudana to grow long and luxuriantly (hair)
غدن gadan languor, lassitude, flaccidity, limpness
غدنة gudna languor, lassitude, flaccidity, limpness
غدان gidān clothes peg
 مغدودن mugdaudin luxuriant, flowing, long (hair)
غدو) غدا) gadā u (gudūw, gadw, غدوة gadwa) to go (away), leave, come, do, or be, early in the morning; to run; to become (ھ s.th.), grow, turn (ھ into), come to be (ھ s.th.) │ وراح غدا (wa-rāḥa) to go back and forth, walk to and fro; to come and go; -- غدي gadiya a (غدا gadan) to breakfast, have breakfast II to give breakfast (ه to s.o.); to give lunch (ه to s.o.) III to go early in the morning (ه to s.o.) │ ويغاديھا يراوحھا yurāwiḥuhā wa-yugādīhā he calls on her time and again or constantly V to breakfast, have breakfast; to lunch, have lunch
غد gad the morrow, the following day; غدا gadan tomorrow; on a future day, sometime in the future │ غد من ,غد في on the following day, tomorrow; الغد في do.; on a future day, sometime in the future; بعد غد day after tomorrow; غد ذات في see ذات
غداء gadā’ pl. اغدية agdiya breakfast; lunch
غداة gadāh pl. غدوات gadawāt early morning; الغداة al-gadāta this morning
غدوة gudwa pl. غدى gudan early morning
غدوة gadwa pl. gadawat lunch; morning errand; وروحاته غدواته (rauḥātuhū) all his goings, his coming and going
مغدى magdan place to which one goes in the morning │ ومراح مغدى (wa-marāḥ) an ever frequented place, an aspired goal 666
غد gadda i (gadd) to fester, suppurate (wound) IV do.; to hasten, speed, make forced marches │ السير (في) اغد (sair) to ran fast, hasten, hurry, speed
غذو) غذا) gadā u (gadw) to feed (ب ه s.o. s.th.), nourish, nurture (ب ه s.o. with) II to feed ( ه ب s.o. s.th.), nourish, nurture (ه ب s.o. with); to provide, supply, furnish, sustain ( ه ,ھ ب s.o. s.th. with), feed, charge, replenish (ھ ب s.th. with) V to be fed (ب s.th.), be nourished, be nurtured (ب with); to feed, live (ب on); to be supplied, be provided, be furnished, be fed (ب with,
e.g., with electric power) VIII to be fed, be nourished, be nurtured
غذو gadw feeding, nourishment, alimentation, nutrition, nurture
غذاء gidā’ pl. اغذية agdiya nourishment, nutriment, nutrition, nurture, food; pl. foodstuffs, victuals, food
غذائي gidā’ī alimental, alimentary, nutritional, nutritious, nutritive │ مواد غذائية (mawādd) foodstuffs, victuals, food, nutritive substances
تغذية tagdiya feeding (also techn.), nourishment, alimentation, nutrition, provisioning, supply, input, charging (e.g., of an electric battery)
غر garra u (غرور gurūr) to mislead, deceive, beguile (ب s.o.); to delude, gull, dazzle, blind (ه s.o.) II to deceive, beguile (ب s.o.); to delude, gull, dazzle, blind (ب s.o.); to entice, allure, tempt, seduce (ب s.o.); to expose to danger, endanger, imperil (ب s.o., s.th.), risk, jeopardize, hazard (ب s.th.) │ بنفسه غرر to expose o.s. to danger, risk one’s life VIII to be dazzled, blinded, fooled, deluded, misled, let o.s. be deceived (ب by), be mistaken (ب in, about); to be or become overweening or conceited X to come unexpectedly (ه to s.o.), surprise (ه s.o.)
غر garr (cutting) edge of a sword
غر girr pl. اغرار agrār inexperienced, gullible, new, green; a greenhorn; inattentive, inadvertent, heedless
غرة gurra pl. غرر gurar white spot on a horse’s face, blaze; the best, the finest, the prime (of s.th.); highlight │ الشھر غرة g.
aš-šahr the first day of the month; غرة في العام at the beginning of the year
غرة garra inadvertency, heedlessness, inattentiveness, inattention; unguarded moment, moment of inadvertence │ على غرة or غرة حين على (ḥīni g.) unexpectedly, unawares, inadvertently, surprisingly; اخذ غرة (حين) على (ukida) to be surprised, be taken by surprise, be caught unawares
غرر garar risk, hazard, jeopardy, danger, peril
غرور gurūr deception; delusion, illusion;: conceit, overweeningness,
 snobbery, vanities, trifles, banalities; danger, peril │ بنفسه الغرور self-deception, self-delusion
غرور garūr deceptive, delusive, fallacious, illusory
غرير garīr deceived, misled, tempted; (pl. also اغراء agirra, اغرة agirra) inexperienced, naive, ingenuous, gullible
غرار girār (cutting) edge of a sword; غرارا girāran in a hurry, hastily │ غرار على in a hurry, hastily; غرار (من) على ... like …, similar to …, in the manner of ..., after the pattern of ...; الغرار ھذا على in this manner; واحد غرار على after one pattern, in the same manner, likewise, alike
غرار garrār deceptive, delusive, fallacious
غرارة garāra inconsiderateness, thoughtlessness, beedlessness │ غرارة على in the manner of ..., after the pattern of ... 667
غرارة girāra pl. غرائر garā’ir  sack (for straw or grain)
اغر agar , f. غراء garrā’ , pl. غر gurr having a blaze (horse); beautiful, handsome; magnanimous, generous; noble; esteemed, honorable (esp. as a complimentary epithet following the name of a newspaper) │ محجل اغر (muḥajjal) unique, singular
مغرور magrūr deceived, fooled, misled, tempted; deluded, dazzled, blind; vain, conceited, overweening, snobbish
غرام grām pl. -āt gram(me)
غرب garaba u (garb) to go away, depart, absent o.s., withdraw (عن from), leave (عن s.o., s.th.); -- garaba u (غروب gurūb) to set (sun, etc.); -- garuba u (غرابة garāba) to be a stranger; to be strange, odd, queer, obscure, abstruse, difficult to comprehend
│ ان عنك يغرب ال you will not have failed to notice that ..., you are, no doubt, aware (of the fact) that ..., you know very well that
… II to go away, leave, depart, absent o.s.; to go westward; to expel from the homeland, banish, exile, expatriate (ه s.o.)
│ وشرق غرب (wa-šarraqa) to get around in the world, see the world IV to say or do a strange or amazing thing; to exceed the
proper bounds (في in), overdo, exaggerate (في s.th.) │ الضحك في اغرب (ḍaḥik) to laugh noisily or heartily, guffaw V to go to a foreign country, emigrate; to be (far) away from one’s homeland; to become an occidental, become Westernized, be Europeanized; to emigrate o.s., to the Western way of life VIII to go to a foreign country, emigrate; to be (far) away from one’s homeland X to find (ھ s.th.) strange, odd, queer, unusual; to deem (ھ s.th.) absurd, preposterous, grotesque; to disapprove (ھ of s.th.); to become an occidental, Westernized, be Europeanized; to assimilate o.s. to the Western way of life │ الضحك في استغرب (ḍaḥik) to laugh noisily or heartily, guffaw
غرب garb west; occident; vehemence, violence, impetuosity, tempestuousness; الغرب the West, the Occident; غربا garban Westward, toward the West │ غربه فل falla garbahū to subdue s.o., put a damper on s.o.; بجنوب غربا garban bi-janūbin southwestward, toward the southwest
غربي garbī western, westerly; occidental, Western; European; an Occidental, a Westerner; الغربيون al- garbīyūn the Western Church (Chr.)
غربة gurba absence from the homeland; separation from one’s native country, banishment, exile; life, or place, away from home
غراب gurāb pl. غربان (girbān, اغرب agrub, اغربة agriba crow; raven; -- occiput; blade (esp. of a hatchet)
غريب garīb pl. غرباء gurabā’  strange, foreign, alien, extraneous (على or عن to s.o.); strange, odd, queer, quaint, unusual, extraordinary, curious, remarkable, peculiar; amazing, astonishing, baffling, startling, wondrous, marvelous; grotesque; difficult to understand, abstruse, obscure (language); remote, outlandish, rare, uncommon (word); (pl. also اغرب agrab) stranger, foreigner, alien; pl. اغراب those living abroad, those away from home, emigrés │ األطوار غريب whimsical, capricious, eccentric, cranky; غريبة مادة (mādda) foreign body, extraneous substance
 غريبة garība pl. غرائب garā’ib  peculiarity; a strange, striking thing, oddity, curiosity, marvel, prodigy, wonder
غروب gurūb setting (of the sun of a star)
غرابة garāba strangeness, curiousness; oddness, queerness, singularity, peculiarity 668
اغرب agrab  stranger, more alien; odder, queerer, more unusual
مغرب magrib pl. مغارب magārib  place or time of sunset; west, occident; (f.) prayer at sunset (Isl. Law); المغرب Maghrib, northwest Africa │ الشمس مغرب
بالد sunset; sunset, of time aš-šams m. وشارق Africa; northwest Maghrib, المغرب ا world; entire the al-arḍ) (m. األرض ومغربھا في do.; wa-l-m al-mašriqān لمشرقان والمغربان world, the over all المغربين والمشرقين world the throughout
مغربي magribī North African, Maghribi; (pl. مغاربة magāriba) a North African, a Maghribi
مغربة look up alphabetically
تغريب tagrīb banishment, expatriation
تغرب tagarrub separation from one’s native country; emigration; Europeanism,
Occidentalism, Westernism
اغتراب igtirāb separation from one’s native country; emigration; Europeanism,
Occidentalism, Westernism
استغراب istigrāb wonder, surprise, astonishment, amazement, perplexity
غارب gārib pl. غوارب gawārib  withers (of the camel, of the horse); pl. wave crests │ غاربه على حبله (القى) ترك (alqā ḥablahū) to give free rein to s.o. or to s.th.
مغرب mugarrab expatriated, exiled, banished; expatriate, exile
مغترب muglarib stranger, foreigner, alien; living away from home
مستغرب mustagrib Europeanized,
Westernized
مستغرب mustagrab strange, odd, queer, quaint, unusual, extraordinary, curious, peculiar
غربل garbala (غربل garbala) to sieve, sift, riddle (ھ s.th.)
غربال girbill pl. .kI priلbll' sieve
garābilīya غرابلية -ūn, pl. garābilī غرابلي
sieve maker, sieve merchant
غرد garida a (garad) to sing, twitter (bird), warble II and V = I
غرد garad singing, song, twitter(ing), warbling (of a bird)
غرد gurd pl. غرود gurūd dune, shifting dune
غريد girrīd singing, twittering, warbling (bird)
agārid  اغاريد pl. ugrūda اغرودة
twittering, warbling, song (of birds)
تغريد tagrīd singing, song, twitter(ing), warbling
مغرد mugarrid singing, twittering, warbling (bird) │ مغرد طائر songbird
غرز garaza i (garz) to prick (ھ ب s.th. with, e.g., with a needle); to thrush, plunge, insert, stick, stab, ram, push, bore (ھ في s.th. into); to plant, implant (ھ ل s.th. in) II to throat, plunge, insert, stick, stab, ram, push, bore (ھ في s.th. into) IV = II; V to penetrate deeply (في into), pierce (في s.th.); to be inserted, be stuck (في into) VII to bore, penetrate (في into), pierce (في s.th.); to sink (في into) VIII to penetrate deeply ( في into), pierce (في s.th.); to be inserted, be stuck (في into) │ السير اغترز (saira) (he put his foot in the stirrup, ready to depart=) his departure was imminent
غرز garz leather stirrup
غرزة gurza pl. غرز guraz stitch
غريزة garīza pl. غرائز garā’iz  nature, natural disposition; natural impulse, instinct
غريزي garīzī natural, native, innate, inborn; instinctive
مغرز magraz pl. مغارز magāriz  (eg.) prank, practical joke 669
غرس garasa i (gars) to plant, implant (ھ في s.th. in); to place, put, set, infix, interpose, interpolate, insert (ھ في s.th. into) IV to
 plant, implant (ھ s.th.) VII to be planted, be implanted; to sink in
غرس gars planted; (pl. اغراس agrās, غراس girās) plant, layer, cion, nursery plant, seedling
غرس girs pl. اغراس agrās plant, layer, cion, nursery plant, seedling
غرسة girsa plant
غراس girās plant; planting time
غراسة girāsa cultivation, growing, raising │ الزياتين) الزيتون غراسة) g. az-zaitūn olive growing; العنب غراسة g. al-‘inab wine growing; viticulture
غراس garā’is  غرائس pl. garīsa غريسة
girās nursery plant, layer, cion, seedling
مغرس magris pl. مغارس magāris  place where s.th. is infixed, interposed or inserted; nursery, plantation, bed
مغارسة mugārasa pl. -āt a contract for the lease of an orchard providing that the lessee, who undertakes to cultivate the orchard, will become owner of one half of it after the orchard has yielded profit (Tun.)
مغارسى mugārisī pl. -ūn one who concludes a mugārasa (q.v.) (Tun.)
غرش girš, gurš pl. غروش gurūš piaster │ غرش صاغ standard piaster
غرض IV الغرض اغرض (garaḍa) to attain the goal V to take sides, be partial, have a predilection, have a bias (ل for)
غرض garaḍ pl. اغراض agrāḍ target, aim, goal, objective, object; intention, design, purpose; object of desire; (personal, selfish) interest; inclination, tendency, propensity; bias, prejudice; pl. اغراض (syr.) articles of everyday use, things, objects, stuff, odds and ends
غرضي garaḍī tendeney- (in compounds), marked by directional, or purposive, presentation
غريض garīḍ pl. اغاريض agārīḍ  fresh, tender
تغرض tagarruḍ prejudice, bias; tendentious attitude
مغرض mugriḍ partial, biased, tendentious; -- (pl. -ūn) partial person; biased person; person guided by personal interests
غرغر gargara (غرغرة gargara) to gargle; to gurgle; to simmer, bubble (pot) II tagargara to gargle; to gurgle │ تغرغرت بالدمع عينه (‘ainuhū bi-d-dam‘) his eyes were bathed in tears
غرغر girgir (coll.; n. un. ة) guinea fowl
غرغرة gargara gargling, gargle, gurgle
غرف garafa i u (garf) to ladle, spoon, scoop (ھ s.th.); to ladle (ھ food) from a cooking pot, and the like, (into a howl) for serving; to serve (ھ a meal) VIII to ladle, scoop (
ھ من s.th. from or out of)
غرفة gurfa pl. غراف girāf the amount of water scooped up with one hand; handful;
-- (pl. -āt, غرف guraf) upstairs room, room on an upper floor; room; chamber (= room; as a public body of administration, etc.); cabinet; compartment, ward │ غرفة
الغرفة or غرفة التجارية room; dining al-akl g. غرفة السفرة commerce; of chamber التجاري
g. as-sufra dining room; القيادة غرفة bridge (naut.); النوم غرفة g. an-naum bedroom
غراف garraf pl. غراريف garārīf  (syr.) a water wheel turned by oxen or horses and used for raising irrigation water from a river onto the fields
مغرفة migrafa pl. مغارف magārif  large spoon, ladle, scoop 670
غرق gariqa a (garaq) to plunge, dive, become immersed, immerge, become submersed, submerge, sink, founder (في in); to go under, be drowned (في in); to be immersed, be engrossed, be absorbed (في in); to be wholly engaged, be loot (في in), be completely taken up (في with) II to plunge, dip, immerse, submerse (ه ,ھ s.o., s.th.); to sink, founder (ھ s.th.), drown (ھ, s.o., s.th.); to inundate, flood (ھ s.th.; السوق the market ب with) IV = II; to exceed the proper bound! (في in); to exaggerate, overdo (في s.th.); to be excessive (في in s.th.), carry (في s.th.) to excess │ الضحك في اغرق (ḍaḥik) to laugh noisily or heartily, guffaw V to be sunk, be foundered X to sink (في into sleep, and the like), be immersed (في in); to absorb,
 engross, engage wholly, claim completely, fill, take up, occupy (ھ, s.o., s.th.); to take, last (ھ a certain time) │ الضحك في استغرق (ḍahik) to laugh noisily or heartily, guffaw XII بالدموع عيناه اغرورقت (igrauraqat ‘aināhū) his eyes were bathed in tears
غريق gariq pl. غرقى garqā drowned; a drowned person; immersed, engrossed, absorbed (في in)
غرقان garqan drowned
تغريق tagrīq drowning; sinking, foundering, scuttling (of a ship); inundation, flooding
اغراق igrāq drowning; sinking, foundering, scuttling (of a ship); inundation, flooding; exaggeration; excessiveness, exorbitance, immoderation, extravagance; hyperbole (rhet.)
غارق gāriq sunk, drowned; immersed, engrossed, absorbed (في in) │ في غارق الدھشة (dahša) completely taken aback, deeply shocked, utterly dismayed
مغرق mugraq immersed, engrossed, absorbed (في in)
مستغرق mustagriq immersed, engrossed, absorbed (في in)
غرلة gurla pl. غرل gural foreskin, prepuce
غرم garima a (gurm, غرامة garāma, مغرم magram) to pay (ھ a fine, and the like); to suffer loss II to fine (ھ s.o.), impose a fine (ه on s.o.) IV = II; pass, ugrima to be very fond, be enamored (ب of), be in love, be infatuated (ب with) V to be fined, be mulcted
غرم gurm damage, loss
غرام garām infatuation (ب with), love ( ب of), passion, ardent desire (ب for); penalty, mulct, fine; see also alphabetically
غرامي garāmī passionate, impassioned, erotic, amorous, amatory, love (used attributively); غراميات garāmīyāt amours, romances, love affairs, amorous adventures │ غرامية رسالة love letter
غريم garīm pl. غرماء guramā’  debtor; creditor; opponent, adversary, antagonist, rival; insulter
غريمة garīma woman opponent, female antagonist, rival
غرامة garāma pl. -āt fine, mulct; indemnity, compensation, damages; reparation, amends, penalty
مغرم magram pl. مغارم magārim  damage, loss; debt; liability, financial obligation; fine
مغرم mugram enamored, (ب of), in love, infatuated (ب with)
غرين garīn (alluvial) mud
غرناطة garnāṭa  Granada (city in S Spain)
غرنوق gurnūq pl. غرانيق garānīq  crane (zool.)
غرنيق girnīq pl. غرانيق garānīq  crane (zool.) 671
غرو) غرا) garā u (gurw) to glue, fix with glue ( ھ s.th.) II = I; IV to make (ه s.o.) covetous (ب for), prod, spur on, goad, egg on, incite, induce, instigate, abet, urge, impel ( ه ب s.o. to do s.th.); to entice, allure, tempt, seduce (ه ب s.o. to); to set (ه ب s.o. on), sick (ھ ب a dog, etc., on game); to bring about, cause, produce, provoke (ھ s.th.); pass. ugriya to desire ardently, love (ب s.th.), be attached (ب to s.th.) │ اغري بين العداوة (‘adāwata) to cause or excite enmity among …
غرو ال lā garwa no wonder! it is small wonder
غرا garan glue
غراء girā’ glue
غرائي girā’ī gluey, glutinous
غروى girawī gluey, glutinous, sticky, ropy, vicious; colloidal (chem.)
غروى ال garwā no wonder! it is small wonder
غراية garrāya pl. -āt (eg.) glue pot
مغراة migrāh glue pot
اغراء igrā’ incitement, instigation, inducement, spur, goad, impetus; incentive, stimulus; enticement, allurement, temptation, seduction
مغر mugrin enticing, alluring, tempting; inciter, instigator, abettor; tempter, seducer
 مغريات mugriyāt lures, temptations
 غز IV to he thorny, prickly; to prick
 غز gazza  Gaza (seaport in S Palestine)
غزي gazzī gauze
 غزر gazara u (gazr, غزارة gazāra) to be plentiful, copious, abundant
غزر gazr abundance, copiousness, profusion, plenty, large quantity, lavish supply
غزير gazīr pl. غزار gizār much, plentiful, copious, abundant, ample; densely growing, luxuriantly growing; rich (بغز in) │ المادة غزير g. al-mādda well- informed, learned, well-read; المواد غزير g. al-mawādd offering a wealth of information (book)
غزارة gazāra abundance, copiousness, profusion, plenty, large quantity, lavish supply
 غزارى gazārī a variety of pigeon
غزل gazala i (gazl) to spin (ھ s.th.); -- gazila a (gazal) to display amorous behavior (ب toward a woman), make love (ب to a woman), court, woo (ب a woman), flirt (ب with a woman); to eulogize in verses (ب a woman) III to speak words of love, make love (ھا to a woman), court, woo (ھا a woman), flirt, dally, philander (ھا with a woman) V to court, woo (ب a woman), make love (ب to a woman), flirt, dally (ب with a woman), make eyes (ب at a woman); to celebrate in love poems (ب a woman, also في s.o.); to extol, laud, eulogize (ب s.th.) VI to flirt (with one another) VIII to spin (ھ s.th.)
غزل gazl spinning; (pl. غرول guzūl) spun thread, yarn │ الغرل مصنع maṣna‘ al-
g. spinning mill
غزل gazal flirt, flirtation, dalliance, dallying; love; words of love, cooing of lovers; love poetry, erotic poetry
غزلي gazalī amorous, amatory, erotic, love (used attributively)
gizlān غرالن gizla, غرلة pl. gazāl غزال
gazelle
غزال gazzāl spinner (of yarn)
غزالة gazāla female gazelle, doe; (rising) sun, disk of the sun; pommel of the camel saddle
غزالة gazzāla spider 672
مغزل magzil pl. مغازل magāzil  spinning mill
مغزل migzal, mugzal pl. مغازل magāzil 
spindle │ مغازل ابو abū m. (eg.) stork
مغازلة mugāzala pl. -āt flirt, flirtation, dalliance, dallying
تغزل tagazzul flirt, flirtation, dalliance, dallying
غزو) غزا) gazā u (gazw) to strive (ھ for), aspire (ھ to); to mean, intend (ھ s.th.); -- gazā u (gazw, غزوان gazawān) to carry out a military expedition, make a raid, foray, or incursion, commit aggression (ه ھ، against s.o., against s.th.), attack, assault (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), raid, invade (ھ s.th.); to conquer (ھ s.th., ه s.o.); to overcome (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) │ السوق غزا (sūq) to flood the market (com.)
غزو gazw assault, raid, incursion, inroad, invasion, attack, aggression; conquest
غزوة gazwa pl. gazawāt military expedition, foray; raid, incursion, inroad, invasion, attack, aggression; conquest; campaign of conquest
غزاوة gazāh pl. غزوات gazawāt military expedition, foray; raid, incursion, inroad, invasion, attack, aggression; conquest; campaign of conquest
مغزى magzan pl. مغاز magāzin sense, meaning, signification, import; moral (of a story); motto; importance, significance, moment, consequence │ دقيق مغزى subtle meaning; مغزى ذو dū m. significant
مغزاة magzāh pl. مغاز magāzin military expedition, foray, raid; المغازى the military campaigns of the Prophet
غاز gāzin pl. غزاة guzāh one who carries out a military expedition or a foray; raider, invader, aggressor, conqueror; الغازى al- gāzī the war lord, warrior champion, ghazi
غازية gāziya pl. غواز gawāzin woman dancer, danseuse
 غس guss (sing. and pl.) worthless
غسق gasaq dusk, twilight before nightfall; dark of night
غسل gasala i (gasl) to wash (ه ھ، ب s.o., s.th. with), launder (ه ب s.th. with); to cleanse, clean (ھ s.th., e.g., the teeth); to purge, cleanse, clear, wash (ھ s.th., من of); to wash (ھ against s.th.) II to wash thoroughly (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) VIII to wash (o.s.); to take a bath, bathe; to perform the major ritual ablution (i.e., a washing of the whole body; (Isl. Law)
غسل gusl pl. اغسال agsāl washing, ablution; the major ritual ablution, i.e., a washing of the whole body (Isl. Law); wash water
غسل gasl wash water
غسلة gasla pl. gasalāt (n. vic.) a wash, an ablution
غسيل gasīl washed; (dirty or washed) clothes, washing
غسول gasūl wash water; washing agent, detergent
غاسول gāsūl soap; lye
غسال gassāl washer, washerman, laundryman
غسل gassāla pl. -āt washerwoman, laundress; washing machine
غسالة gusāla dirty wash water, slops
مغسل magsil, magsala pl. مغاسل magāsil  washing facility, washroom, lavatory; washhouse
مغسل migsal washbasin; washbowl, washdish, washtub
magāsil  مغاسل pl. magsala مغسلة
washstand
مغتسل mugtasal washroom, lavatory
غش gašša u (gašš) to act dishonestly (ه toward s.o.); to deceive, fool, mislead, cheat, gull, dupe (ه s.o.); to debase, vitiate, adulterate ( ه s.th., esp. food-stuffs) II to act dishonestly (ه toward s.o.); to deceive, fool, mislead, cheat, gull, dupe (ه s.o.) VII and VIII to be deceived, be fooled, be cheated, be duped; to let o.s. be deceived X to regard (ه s.o.) as dishonest or as a
fraud; to suspect (ه s.o.) of fraud or deception
غش gašš adulteration, corruption, debasement; fraud, deceit
غش gišš faithlessness disloyalty, perfidy; deception, deceit; fraud, imposture, swindle
غشاش gašāš fraud, cheat, swindler, impostor; deceptive, delusive, false
مغشوش magšūš deceived, fooled, cheated, duped; adulterated, corrupted, debased
غشم gašama i (gašm) to treat unjustly or tyrannically, to wrong, oppress (ه s.o.); to act unjustly or tyrannically (ه toward s.o.); to act thoughtlessly, haphazardly (ھ in s.th.) VI to feign ignorance or inexperience X to regard (ه s.o.) as dumb, stupid, ignorant, or inexperienced ه
غشم gašm oppression, repression, ill- treatment
غشوم gašūm unjust, unfair, iniquitous, tyrannical; oppressor, tyrant │ الغشوم القوة brute force
غشيم gašīm pl. غشماء gušamā’ inexperienced, ignorant, foolish, dumb, stupid; new (at an office), green, a greenhorn; new, boorish, uneducated; unskilled, untrained, clumsy, awkward, gauche; raw, crude, unprocessed, unworked
غشومة gušūma inexperience, foolishness
غاشم gāšim unjust, unfair, iniquitous, tyrannical; oppressor, tyrant; scum, dross
│ غاشمة قوة (qūwa) brute force
(غشو and غشا (غشي gašā u (gašw) to come (ه to s.o.; ھ to a place); -- غشي gašiya a (غشاوة gašāwa) to cover, wrap up, envelop, conceal, veil (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to come, descend (ه upon s.o.), overcome, overwhelm (ه s.o.); to be dark (night); -- gašiya a (غشيان gašayān, gišyān) to come (to s.o.; ھ to place); to go to see, visit (ه s.o., ھ s.th.), call (ه on s.o.); to sleep (ھا with a woman); to cover (ھا the female animal); to commit, perpetrate (ھ e.g., an outrage); to yield, give in (ھ to a craving);
-- pass. عليه غشي (gušiya) (غشي gašy, gušy)
 to lose consciousness, faint, swoon II to cover, wrap up, envelop, veil (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to spread a cover or wrap (ه ھ، over s.o., over s.th.); to overlay, coat, plate (ھ s.th.) IV to be dark (night); to spread a cover or wrap (ه ,ھ over) V to cover o.s. ( ب with), wrap o.s. (ب in) X ثيابه استغشي (tiyābahū) to hide one’s head in one’s clothes so as not to see or hear
غشي gašy, gušy unconsciousness, fainting, swoon(ing)
غشية gašya fainting spell, swoon, faint غشوة gašwa veil, wrap, cover, covering غشاء gišā’ pl. اغشية agšiya cover,
covering, wrap, wrapper, wrapping, envelope; coating, coat, plating; integument; film, pellicle; membrane; valve │ األنقى الغشاء (anfī) nasal mucosa; البكارة غشاء g. al-bakāra hymen, virginal membrane; المخاطئ الغشاء (mukāṭi’) mucous membrane, mucosa
(kunāq) الخناق الغشائي gišā’ī: غشائي (med.) diphtheria
غشاوة gišāwa, gišāwa veil, wrap, cover, covering
غشيان gašayān, gišyān unconsciousness, faint(ing), swoon(ing)
مغشى magšan place at which one arrives, object of a visit 674
غاشية gāšiya pl. غواش gawāšin pericardium; misfortune, calamity, disaster; faint, swoon; insensibility, stupor; servants, attendants, retinue, suite
غص g□aṣṣ (1  peril. perf. gaṣiṣtu) a ( غصص) to be choked; to choke (ب on, esp. on some food); to be overcrowded, congested, jammed, packed, crammed (ب with) │ المكان بھم غص (makānu) the place was overcrowded IV to choke (ه s.o.) VIII to be overcrowded, congested, jammed, packed, crammed
غصة guṣṣa pl. -āt, غص guṣaṣ that which causal choking, a lump in the throat; mortal distress, torment, agony, ordeal, choking sound, suppressed moan
│ الموت غصة g. al-maut agony of death
غاص gāṣṣ replete, crowded, jammed, packed, crammed (ب with)
غصب gaṣaba i (gaṣb) to take away by force or illegally, extort (ھ s.th., على من، ه، from s.o.), rob (ھ s.th.; ه ھ or من or على
s.o. of s.th.), seize unlawfully, usurp (ھ s.th.), take illegal possession (ھ of s.th.); to force, compel, coerce (ه s.o., على to); to abduct, carry off (ھا a woman); to rape, ravish, violate (ھا a woman); to conquer, subdue (على s.o.) VIII = I │ ابواب اغتصب البالد to force one’s entry into a country
غصب igtiṣāb forcible, illegal seizure, extortion; usurpation, unlawful arbitrariness (Isl. Law); force, compulsion, coercion, constraint │ غصبا gaṣban and بالغصب forcibly, by force; عنه غصبا against his will, in defiance of him
اغتصاب igtiṣāb forcible, illegal seizure, extortion, robbery, illegal appropriation, usurpation; ravishment, violation, rape (of a woman); force, compulsion, coercion, constraint
غاصب gāṣib pl. -ūn, guṣṣāb usurper
مغصوب magṣūb acquired by unlawful arbitrariness, extorted, usurped; forced, compelled, coerced, constrained
مغتصب mugtaṣib violent, outrageous, brutal; usurper
غصن II and IV to put forth branches, to branch (tree)
اغصان guṣūn, غصون pl. guṣn غصن
agṣān twig, bough, limb, branch
غصنة guṣna twig, shoot, cion, sprout
غض gaḍḍa (1  peril. perf. qaḍaḍtu) i and (1  peril. perf. qaḍiḍtu) a (غضوضة guḍūda, غضاضة gaḍāda) to be or become fresh, succulent, tender (esp. a plant); -- gaḍḍa u (gaḍḍ, غضاضة gaḍāḍa) to cast down, lower (من or ھ one’s eyes, one’s glance, out of modesty, and the like), to lower, lessen, diminish (من the value, the prestige of s.o. or s.th.), detract, derogate (من from s.o., from s.th.) │ طرفه غض (ṭarfahū) to lower one’s eyes; عنه (النظر) الطرف غض (naẓara) to overlook, let pass, disregard s.th., pass over s.th., wink at s.th., pay no attention to s.th., have no objection to s.th.
غض gaḍḍ aversion (of the glance) │ عنه (الطرف) النظر غض g. an-naẓar (aṭ-ṭart) overlooking of s.th.; disregarding of s.th.;
 عن النظر بغض aside from ..., not to speak of
..., let alone ..., regardless of …, irrespective of ..., notwithstanding …
غض gaḍḍ fresh, succulent, juicy, tender; lush, luxuriant (plant)
غضة guḍḍa shortcoming, deficiency, fault, defect
غضيض gaḍīḍ fresh, succulent, juicy, tender
غضاضة gaḍāḍa freshness, succulence, juiciness, tenderness; shortcoming, deficiency, fault, defect; blot, stain, 675 disgrace, shame │ في غضاضة وجد ما to take no offence at …, have no objection to …
غضوضة gudūḍa freshness, succulence, juiciness, tenderness
غضب gaḍiba a (gaḍab) to be or become angry, cross, mad, vexed, irritated, exasperated, furious, to fret (من or على at s.th., with s.o.); to stand up (ل for), defend (ل s.th.) III to be cross, be on bad terms (ه with s.o.) IV to annoy, exasperate, anger, make angry, enrage, infuriate (ه s.o.); to vex, irrigate, gall, provoke (ه s.o.) V = I
غضب gaḍab wrath, rage, fury; anger, exasperation, indignation; ل غضبا (gaḍaban) for the protection of
غضب gaḍib wrathful, angry, exasperated, irate, furious, infuriated, enraged; vexed, annoyed, irritated, galled
غضبة gaḍba fit of rage, angry outburst, tantrum
غضوب gaḍūb irascible, choleric, irritable
غضباني gudābī irascible, choleric, irritable; sullen, morose
غضبان gaḍbān , f. غضبى gaḍbā, pl. غضابgiḍāb, غضابى gaḍabā, guḍabā wrathful, angry, exasperated, irate, furious, infuriated, enraged
اغضاب igdāb exasperation, infuriation; vexation, irritation, annoying; provocation
غاضب gāḍib wrathful, angry, exasperated, irate, furious, infuriated, enraged; vexed, annoyed, irritated, galled
of object مغضوب عليه magḍūb: مغضوب anger
غضر gaḍara i (gadr) to turn away (عن from); to turn (على against s.o. or to s.o.); -- gaḍira a (gaḍar) to be or become rich, abundant, lavish, opulent, lush, luxuriant
غضر gaḍir abundant, lavish, opulent, lush, luxuriant
غضير gaḍīr fresh, green (plant)
غضارة gaḍāra freshness; affluence, prosperity, opulence
gaḍārīf غضاريف pl. guḍrūf غضروف
cartilage, gristle
غضن II to wrinkle, pucker, shrivel, fold, crease (ھ s.th.) III to wink amorously (ھا at a woman) V to wrinkle, shrivel, form, creases or corrugations; to be or become wrinkled, creased, folded, corrugated
غضن gaḍn, gaḍan pl. غضون guḍūn wrinkle, fold, crease, corrugation; (only sg.) trouble, toil, labor, hardship, difficulty
│ غضون في ... in the course of, during, within; غضون في meanwhile, in the meantime
غضنفر gaḍanfar lion
(غضو) IV to close one’s eyes (also with عينيه ‘ainahū); to overlook, disregard, avoid seeing, condone (ھ عن، s.th.), let (ھ عن، s.th.) pass, shut one’s eyes (ھ عن، to s.th.), take no notice (ھ عن، of s.th.); to be lenient (عن with), have indulgence, show forbearance (عن for), wink, connive (عن at) VI to pretend not to notice; to disregard (عن s.th.); عنه اغضى = عنه تغاضى
(الغضى جمر من احر على :غضا (غضى (aḥarra, jamri l-g□.) lit: in a hotter spot than the live embers of gaḍā (i.e. a variety of euphorbia), i.e. on pins and needles, in an unbearable situation
اغضاء igḍā’ overlooking, connivance, condonation, disregard; indulgence, forbearance
تغاض tagāḍin overlooking, connivance, condonation, disregard; indulgence, forbearance 676
غط gaṭṭa u (gaṭṭ) to immerse, dip, plunge (في ه ,ھ s.o., s.th. in); -- gaṭṭa i (غطيط gaṭīṭ) to snore IV to immerse, dip, plunge (ه ,ھ في s.o., s.th. in) VII to be immersed, be dipped, be plunged (في in)
 غطيط gaṭīṭ snoring, snore
غطيطة guṭaiṭa fog, mist
غطرة guṭra designation of the kūfīya, or headcloth worn under the ‘iqāl, in Nejd and Bahrein
غطرس gaṭrasa to be haughty, arrogant, supercilious, overbearing, snobbish, conceited, overweening. self-important II tagaṭrasa do. │ مشيته في تغطرس (mišyatihī) to display a haughty bearing, swagger, strut
غطرسة gaṭrasa haughtiness, superciliousness, arrogance, insolence, impudence, snobbishness, conceitedness, self-importance
غطريس giṭrīs pl. غطاريس gaṭārīs  haughty, supercilious, arrogant, overbearing, snobbish, conceited, overweening, self-important
متغطرس mutagaṭris haughty, supercilious, arrogant, overbearing, snobbish, conceited, overweening, self- important
غطريف giṭrīf pl. غطاريف gaṭārīf , غطارف gaṭārif , غطارفة gaṭārifa potentate; a noble, great, famous man
غطس gaṭasa i (gaṭs) to dip, plunge, immerse, submerse (ه ,ھ في s.o., s.th. into water); to dive, plunge, become immersed, sink, submerge (في in water) II to dip, plunge, immerse, submerse (ه ,ھ في s.o., s.th. into water); (Chr.) to baptize (ه s.o.) V to dive; to bathe (في in)
غطس gaṭs dipping, plunging, immersion; diving; sinking (trans. and intr.); submersion
الغطاس (Chr.); baptism giṭās غطاس
Epiphany (Chr.)
غطاس gaṭṭās diver (man or bird)
مغطس magṭis (migṭas) pl. مغاطس magāṭis  bathtub; plunge bath │ المغطس عيد ‘īd al-m. Epiphany (Chr.)
تغطيس tagṭīs dipping, plunging, immersion; submersion; baptism (Chr.)
غاطس gāṭis draft (of a ship)
غطش gaṭaša i (gaṭš) to be or become dark (night); -- gaṭiša a (gaṭaš) to become
dim (eye); to be dim-sighted V to be dim, dim-sighted (eye)
غطش gaṭaš dim-sightedness
غطم giṭamm huge, vast (ocean)
غطو) غطا) gaṭā u (gaṭw) to cover, cover up (ھ s.th.) II to cover, wrap, envelop, conceal ( ه ھ، ب s.o., s.th. with); to slip (ھ ب over s.th. s.th. else), cover (ھ ب s.th. with); to cover (ھ s.th., e.g., expenses, the goal in sports); to outshine, eclipse, obscure (على s.o., s.th.); to drown (على s.th., of voices, etc.); to be stronger, be more decisive (على than) V to be covered, wrapped, enveloped, concealed (ب with. by); to cover o.s. (ب with), wrap o.s., veil o.s., conceal o.s. (ب in) VIII = V
غطاء giṭā’ pl. اغطية agṭiya cover, covering, integument, wrap, wrapper, wrapping, envelope; covering (= clothing); lid │ الرأس غطاء headgear
تغطية tagṭiya cover(ing) (of expenses, of currency, of the goal in sports); cover of notes in circulation, backing of notes, note coverage
غف gaffa i (eg.) to take unawares; to grab, grasp, seize (على s.o.)
غفر gafara i (gafr, غفر magfira, غفران gufrān) to forgive (ل ھ s.o. s.th.), grant pardon (ھ ل to s.o. for s.th.), remit (ھ s.th.) │ يغفر ال (yugfaru) unpardonable, irremissible, inexcusable VIII to forgive 677 (ل ھ s.o. s.th.), grant pardon (ل ھ to
s.o. for), remit (ھ s.th.) │ يغتفر ال (yugtafaru) unpardonable, irremissible, inexcusable X to ask s.o.’s (ه) pardon (ل or من or ھ for an offense), ask (ه s.o.) to forgive (ل or من or ھ an offense), apologize (ه to s.o., ل or من or ھ for) │
ﷲ استغفر I ask God’s forgiveness! a formular phrase used on various occasions, esp. when modestly declining compliments and amiabilities, approx.: please don’t (say so)! not at all!
غفر gafr pardon, forgiveness; غفرا
gafran pardon me! I beg your pardon!
غفور gafūr readily inclined to pardon, much-forgiving (esp. of God)
غفار gaffār readily inclined to pardon, much-forgiving (esp. of God)
 غفران gufrān pardon, forgiveness, remission │ غفران صوم عيد ‘īd ṣaum al-g. or الغفران عيد Day of Atonement, Yom Kippur (Jud.)
مغفرة magfira pardon, forgiveness, remission
مغفور magfūr: له المغفور (he who has been forgiven), the deceased, the late ...
 غفر II to guard (على s.o., s.th.), watch (على over s.o.) over s.th.)
غفرة gufra cover; lid
غفير gafīr numerous (crowd), abundant (quantity), large (number); (pl. غفراء gufarā’ ) guard, sentinel; watchman │ جم غفير (جمع) (jamm, jam‘) large number or quantity, large gathering of people
غفارة gifāra pl. غفائر gafā’ir  kerchief for covering the bead, headcloth
غفارة gaffāra cope (Chr.)
مغفر migfar pl. مغافر magāfir  helmet
غفقة gafqa light slumber
غفل gafala u (غفلة gafla, غفول gufūl) to neglect, not to heed, disregard, ignore (من s.th.), be forgetful, be heedless, be unmindful (عن of), pay no attention (عن to) II to make (ه s.o.) negligent, careless, heedless, or inattentive III to use, or take advantage of, s.o.’s (ه) negligence, inadvertence, inattention, heedlessness, or carelessness; to surprise, take by surprise, take unawares (ه s.o.) IV to neglect, not to heed, disregard, ignore (ھ s.th.), be forgetful, be heedless, be unmindful (ھ of s.th.), pay no attention (ھ to s.th.); to pass (ھ over s.th.), slight, leave out, omit, skip (ھ s.th.); to leave unspecified (ھ s.th.) V = III; VI to feign inattention, inadvertence, negligence, or carelessness; to pretend to be, or make as if, inattentive, inadvertent, negligent, or careless; to neglect, disregard, ignore, slight (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), pay no attention (عن to), be uninterested ( عن in), be indifferent (عن to) X = III; to regard (ه s.o.) as stupid, as a fool; to make a fool of s.o. (ه), pull s.o.’s (ه) leg
غفل gufl careless, heedless, unmindful, inadvertent; undesignated, unmarked; without name, anonymous; not provided ( من with), devoid (من of) │ التاريخ من غفل
undated, without date, bearing no date; غفل التوقيع) اإلمضاء من) (imḍā’) without signature, unsigned, anonymous; غفل حديد unprocessed iron, pig iron, crude iron
غفل gafal negligence, inadvertence, inattention, heedlessness, carelessness
غفلة gafla negligence, inadvertence, inattention, heedlessness, carelessness; indifference; foolishness; stupidity │ موت الغفلة maut al-g. sudden death; غفلة على and غفلة حين على (ḥini g.) suddenly, all of a sudden, unawares, inadvertently, unexpectedly, surprisingly
غفالن gaflān  negligent, neglectful, careless, heedless, inadvertent, inattentive; drowsy, sleepy
تغفيل tagfīl stultification 678
اغفال igfāl neglect, disregard, ignoring, nonobservance, slight(ing); omission, skipping
تغافل tagāful neglect
غافل gāfil pl. -ūn, غفول gufūl, غفل guffal negligent, neglectful, careless, heedless, inadvertent, unaware, inattentive
مغفل mugaffal apathetic, indifferent, inattentive; gullible, easily duped, a sucker; simple-minded, artless; simpleton
مغفل mugfal anonymous │مغفلة شركة (= Fr. société anonyme) joint-stock corporation
متغفل mutagaffil dunce, dolt, numskull (غفو and غفا (غفى gafā u (gafw, gufūw) to
slumber, doze, take a nap; to doze off, nod off, fall asleep; -- gafiya a (غفية gafya) do. IV do.
غفوة gafwa pl. -āt slumber, nap, doze, cat nap
اغفاءة igfā’a slumber, nap, doz., cat nap
غل galla u (gall) to insert, put, stick, enter (في ھ s.th. in(to) or between); to penetrate, enter (ھ s.th. or into s.th.); to apply an iron collar or manacles (ه on s.o.), handcuff, shackle, fetter (ه s.o.); to produce, yield, yield crops (land) │ يده غل عنقه الى (yadahū, ‘unuqihī) (lit.: to fetter one’s hand to one’s neck, i.e.) not to spend or give away anything, be
 niggardly; -- galla i (gill) to be filled with hatred or rancor (breast); -- pass. gulla (gull, غلة gulla) to suffer violent thirst, burn with thirst II to apply an iron collar or manacles (ه on s.o.), handcuff, shackle, fetter (ه s.o.) IV to produce, yield, yield crops (land); to yield (على ھ to s.o. s.th.) V to enter, penetrate (في s.th. or into s.th.) VII = V X to rake in, gain, win, obtain, reap (ھ s.th.); to realize, or make, a profit (ھ on s.th.), receive the proceeds (ھ of s.th., esp. of land, and the like), turn to (good) account, invest profitably, utilize ( ھ s.th.); to profit (ه by s.o., ھ by s.th.), derive advantage or profit (ه ھ، from), make capital (ھ out of s.th.), capitalize (ھ on s.th.); to take advantage (ه ھ، of), exploit (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.)
غل gill rancor, hatred, spite, malice
غل gull burning thirst; (pl. اغالل aglāl) iron collar; manacles, handcuffs; pl. chains, shackles, fetters
غلة gulla burning thirst
غلة galla pl. -āt, غالل gilāl yield, produce, crops; proceeds, revenue, returns (esp. of farming); grain, cereals; corn; fruits
غليل galīl burning thirst; thirst for revenge; rancor, ill will; ardent desire; (pl. غالل gilāl) exhausted with thirst, very thirsty
غاللة galāla pl. غالئل galā’il  a fine, diaphanous cape, mantilla, veil; shirtlike garment, gown │ النوم غاللة g. an-naum nightshirt, nightgown
استغالل istiglāl utilization; development, working (of a mine, and the like), exploitation (of a mine; also = selfish utilization, sweating); usufruct; abuse
استغاللي istiglālī serving exploitation, exploitative
مغلول maglūl fettered, shackled; exhausted with thirst, very thirsty │ مغلول اليد m. al-yad inactive, idle
مغل mugill productive, fruitful, fertile (land, soil)
مستغل mustagill exploiter, utilizer, usufructuary, beneficiary
مستغل mustagall pl. -āt that which yields crops, proceeds, or profit; yield, produce, proceeds; profit 679
غلب galaba i (galb, غلبة galaba) to subdue, conquer, vanquish, defeat, beat, lick (على or ه ھ، so., s.th.), get the better (على or ه ھ، of s.o., of s.th.), be victorious, triumph, gain ascendancy, get the upperhand, achieve supremacy (على or ه ھ، over s.o., over s.th.); to master, surmount, overcome (على or ھ s.th.); to seize (على or ھ s.th.), take possession (على or ھ of s.th.), lay hold (على or ھ on s.th.); to overpower, overcome, overwhelm (على or ه s.o.); to snatch, wrench, wrest (ه على from s.o. s.th.), rob, plunder (ه على s.o. of s.th.); to prevail, (pre)dominate, be preponderant ( على in s.th.); to be probable, be likely │ الظن على غلب (ẓann) to be probable, be likely; الجدة) الصحة عليه تغلب) (ṣiḥḥatu, jiddatu) (to be) fairly, almost correct or new; الكآبة عليه تغلب (ka‘ābatu) he is in low spirits most of the time, melancholy prevails in him; الكرم عليه يغلب (karamu) his predominant, or foremost, quality is generosity II to make (ه s.o.) get the upperhand (على over), make (ھ s.o.) triumph (على over); to put (ھ على s.th. above or before) III to try to defeat (ه s.o.); to fight, combat (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), struggle, wrestle (ھ ه، with; المصاعب with difficulties); to befall, overcome (ه s.o.; e.g., sleep) V to triumph, gain the mastery (على over), overcome, surmount, master ( على s.th.), cope (على with), break (على a resistance); to outweigh (على s.th.) │ تغلب النعاس عليه (nu‘āsu) he was overcome by drowsiness VI to wrestle with one another, struggle
غلب galab (act of) conquering, defeating, surmounting, overcoming
غلبة galaba victory; (eg.) idle talk, chatter, prattle
غلباوي galabāwī (eg.) garrulous, voluble, talkative; chatterbox, prattler, windbag
غالب gallāb victorious, triumphant, conquering
اغلب aglab  (elative, with def. article or foll. genit.) the greater portion, the majority, most (of) │ األغلب في in most
 cases; mostly, in general, generally; في واألعم األغلب (wa-l-a‘amm) do.; الظن اغلب في (a. iẓ-ẓann) most likely, most probably, in all probability; امره اغلب aglaba amrihī and األمر اغلب in most cases, mostly; most likely, most probably, in all probability
اغلبية aglabīya majority, greater portion
│ خاصة اغلبية (kāṣṣa) qualified majority; مطلقة اغلبية (muṭlaqa) absolute majority (pol.)
غالب gilāf combat(ing), fight; struggle, strife, contest
مغالبة mugālaba combat(ing), fight; struggle, strife, contest
تغلب tagallub surmounting, overcoming, mastery (على of s.th.)
غالب gālib (pre)dominant; (with foll. genit. or suffix) most of, the greater portion of, the majority of; (pl. غلبة galaba) victor │ غالبا gāliban and الغالب في mostly, in most cases, for the most part, largely; in general, generally; most likely, most probably; ان والغالب and the rule is that …, as a rule ...
غالبية gālibīya majority, greater portion
مغلوب maglūb defeated, vanquished; beaten; recessive (biol.) │ امره على مغلوب (amrihī) helpless
مغلب mugallab defeated, overwhelmed, overcome
غلس galas darkness of night (esp. that preceding daybreak)
غلصمة galṣama pl. غالصم galāṣim  epiglottis
غلط galiṭa a (galaṭ) to make, or commit, a mistake, commit an error, err, be mistaken II to accuse (ه s.o.) of a mistake or error, put s.o. (ه) in the wrong; to make (ه s.o.) commit a mistake or error 680 III to seek to involve (ه s.o.) in errors or mistakes; to deceive, beguile, cheat, swindle (s.o.) IV to make (ه s.o.) commit a mistake or error VI to mislead one another, cheat one another
غلط galaṭ pl. اغالط aglāṭ error, mistake, blunder; incorrect, wrong │ الحس غلط g.
al-ḥiss deception of the senses, illusion; في غلط االمر (amr) there is a but in the case, there is a hitch somewhere
غلطة galṭa pl. galaṭāt,
 aglāṭ اغالالت
 غالظة gilāẓi thickness grossness;
error, mistake, blunder │ مطبعية غلطة
(maṭba‘īya) misprint, erratum
غلطان galṭān  one who commits a mistake or error; mistaken, erring, wrong
agālīṭ اغاليط -āt, pl. uglūṭa اغلوطة
captious question
مغلطة maglaṭa pl. مغالط magaliṭ captious question
مغالطة mugālaṭa pl. -āt cheating, deceit; swindle, fraud; falsification, distortion; fallacy, sophism
غلظ galuẓa u and galaẓa i (gilaẓ, غلظة gilẓa, غالظة gilāẓa) to be or become thick, gross, coarse, crude, rude, rough, rugged; to become viscous, viscid, tough, sirupy (of a liquid, mush); to treat (على s.o.) harshly, ruthlessly II to make (ھ s.th.) thick, gross, big, coarse, crude, rude, rough, or rugged; to thicken, coarsen (ه s.th.) │ اليمين غلظ to swear a sacred oath IV القول في or القول له اغلظ (qaula, fī l-qauli) to bark at s.o. rudely, use rude language toward s.o., speak rudely, impolitely with
s.o. X to become thick, gross, big, coarse, crude, rude, rough, rugged; to find (ه s.th.) thick, coarse, crude, rude, rough, rugged
غالظ gilāẓ thickness, grossness; coarseness, crudeness, roughness, ruggedness; harshness, ruthlessness, rudeness, impoliteness, boorishness
غلظة gilẓa thickness, grossness; coarseness, crudeness, roughness, ruggedness; harshness, ruthlessness, rudeness, impoliteness, boorishness
غليظ galīẓ□ pl. غالظ thick (e.g., curtain, fabric); fat and uncouth, hulking, burly, gross (person, body); viscous, viscid, sirupy (liquid); solid, stringy, tough (food); coarse, crude (fabric, words, person); rough, rugged (ground); harsh, callous, rude, churlish, inconsiderate, boorish; inviolable, sacred (alliance, oath)
│ الرقبة غليظ g. ar-raqaba stiff-necked, obdurate, obstinate, stubborn; الغليظ المعى (mi‘ā) the large intestine (anat.); غليظة يمين binding, sacred oath
 coarser, ness, crudeness, roughness, ruggedness
اغلظ aglāẓ thicker, grosser; coarser, cruder, rougher; ruder, more impolite
binding, يمين مغلظة mugallaẓ: مغلظ oath sacred
غلغل galgala to penetrate (في s.th. or into s.th.); to enter (في s.th. or into s.th.); to plunge, become immersed, submerge (في in) II tagalgala to set in, descend, fall (night); to penetrate (في s.th. or into s.th.); to enter ( في s.th. or into s.th.); to plunge, become immersed, submerge (في in); to be crammed (في into), be deeply embedded.
b. ensconced (في in); to interfere, meddle
متغلغل mutagalgil deeply embedded (في in); extensive, widely extended, far- reaching (connections)
غلف II to put or wrap (ھ s.th.) in a cover, wrap, envelope, or case; to wrap, envelop (ھ s.th.); to cover (ب ھ s.th. with)
غلفة gulfa foreskin, prepuce
غالف gilāf pl. غلف guluf cover, covering, wrapping, wrapper, wrapping, jacket (of a book); case, box; envelope 681
gulf غلف pl. galfā’ , غلفاء f. aglaf , اغلف
uncircumcised; rude, uncivilized
مغلف mugallaf uncircumcised; (pl. -āt) cover, covering, wrap, wrapper, wrapping, envelope (of a letter)
غلق galaqa i (galq) to close, shut (ھ s.th., a door); to look, bolt (ھ s.th., a door); galiqa a (galaq): الرھن غلق (rahnu) the pledge was forfeited as the pledger was unable to redeem it II to close shut (ھ s.th., a door); to lock, bolt (ھ s.th., a door) IV = II; to declare a pledge (رھنا rahnan) to be forfeited, foreclose (رھنا a mortgage); pass. ugliqa to be obscure, dark, ambiguous, dubious, incomprehensible (على to s.o.) VII to be closed, shut, looked, or bolted; to be incomprehensible, X to be obscure, dark, ambiguous, incomprehensible; to be difficult, intricate, complicated │ استغلق الكالم عليه (kalamu) he was unable to speak, he was struck dumb, he was speechless
غلق galaq pl. اغلق aglāq lock, padlock
غلق galiq obscure, dark, ambiguous, dubious, abstruse, recondite, difficult to comprehend
غالقة gilāqa unpaid balance
مغالق miglāq pl. مغاليق magālīq  look; padlock; breech (of a firearm); any closing or fastening mechanism, as, a latch, a catch, a clasp, a cap, a cover, a lid, a outoff, etc.
اغالق iglāq closing, shutting, locking, bolting, shutting-off, barring; foreclosure (of a mortgage)
انغالق ingilāq obscurity, abstruseness, incomprehensibility
مغلق maglaq closed, shut; locked, bolted; obscure, dark, ambiguous, dubious, abstruse, recondite, difficult to comprehend
مستغلق mustagliq obscure, dark, cryptic, ambiguous, equivocal
غلم galima a (galam, غلم gulma) to be excited by lust, be seized by sensuous desire VIII
= I
غلم galim excited by lu.t. seized by sensuous desire, wanton, lewd, lascivious, lustful; in heat, rutted
غلمة gulma lust, carnal appetite, sensuous desire; heat, rut
gilma غلمة gilmān, غلمان pl. gulām غالم
boy, youth, lad; slave; servant, waiter غالمية gulāmīya youth, youthfulness غيلم gailam male tortoise
غلم gulūma youth, youthfulness
غلو) غال) galā u (gulūw) to exceed the proper bounds, be excessive, go too far (في in), overdo, exaggerate (في s.th.); -- galā u ( غالء galā ) to be high, be stiff (price); to become expensive, undergo a prise raise (merchandise); to be expensive, be high priced II to raise the price or s.th. (ھ) III to exceed the proper bounds, be excessive, go too far (في in), overdo, exaggerate (في s.th.); to demand too high a price, charge too much (ب for); to put greet store (ب by s.th.), ascribe great value (ب to s.th.), rate highly (ب s.th.) IV = II; to declare (ھ s.th.)
 to be dear or precious, appreciate, value, prize, treasure, cherish (ھ s.th.); to laud, extol, praise highly (ھ s.th.) VI to exceed the proper bounds, be excessive, go too far (في in); to overdo, exaggerate (في ب، s.th.) X to find (ھ s.th.) expensive or costly
غلو gulūw exceeding of proper bounds, excess, extravagance; exaggeration
غالء galā’  high cost, high level of prices, rise in prices; high price
غلواء gulawā’ , gulwā’  exceeding of proper bounds, excess, extravagance │ غلوائه من خفف (kaffāfa) to dampen s.o.’s ardor, curb s.o.’s enthusiasm 682
اغلى aglā more expensive; more valuable, more costly
مغاالة mugālāh exceeding of proper bounds, excess, extravagance, exaggeration
اغالء iglā’ laudation, extolment, high praise; admiration
غال gālin expensive, high priced; valuable, costly; dear, beloved; -- (pl. غالة gulāh) adherent of an extreme sect; extremist, radical; fanatic adherent, fanatic
غلى galā i (galy, غليان galayān) to boil, bubble up; to ferment (alcoholic beverage) II to make (ھ s.th.) boil; to boil (ھ s.th.) IV = II
غلو galy boiling, ebullition
غلي galayān boiling, ebullition
غليون galyūn pl. غاليين galāyīn, water pipe, narghile, hubble-bubble; smoking pipe, tobacco pipe; see also below
غالية gallāya pl. -āt boiler, kettle, caldron │ غالية آلة steam boiler
غالية gāliya a perfume made of muek and ambergris (Galia moschata)
مغلي maglīy broth; decoction (pharm.)
galāwīn  غالوين galāyīn , غاليين pl. galyūn غليون
galleon; see also غلى
غم gamma u (gamm) to cover, veil, conceal (ھ s.th.); to fill (ه s.o.) with sadness, pain, or grief, to pain, grieve, distress (ه s.o.); pass. gumma to be obscure, incomprehensible ( على to s.o.) II to cover, veil, conceal (ھ
s.th.) IV to be overcast (sky); to fill (ه s.o.) with sadness, pain, or grief, to pain, grieve, distress (ه s.o.) VII to be distressed, be worried, be sad, grieve, pine, worry VIII = VII
غم gamm pl. غموم gumūm grief, affliction, sorrow, distress, sadness, worry, anxiety
غمة gumma grief, affliction, sorrow, distress, sadness, anxiety
غمام gamām (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. غمائم
gamā’im  clouds │ الغمام حب ḥabb al-g.
hail
غمامة gimāma pl. غمائم gamā’m  blinder, blinker (for horses, etc.); muzzle (for animals)
اغم agamm , f. غماء gammā’  covered with dense hair, hairy, hirsute, shaggy; thick, dense (clouds)
غام gamm grievous, distressing, sorrowful, sad, painful; sultry, muggy (day, night)
مغموم magmūm grieved, distressed, afflicted, worried, sad
مغتم mugtamm grieved, distressed, afflicted, worried, sad
غمدgamada i u (gamd) to sheathe, put into the scabbard (ھ the sword); to plunge, threat ( ھ the sword into s.o.’s breast); to encompass, shelter, protect, cover (ه s.o., برحمته bi-raḥmatihī with His grace; of God) II to conceal s.o.’s (ه) offenses or shortcomings IV to sheathe, put into the scabbard (ھ the sword) V to encompass, shelter, protect, cover (ه s.o., برحمته bi- raḥmatihī with His grace; of God)
gumūd غمود agmād, اغماد pl. gimd غمد
sheath, scabbard
غمر gamara u (غمارة gamāra, غمورة gumūra) to be plentiful, copious, abundant, abound (water); to overflow (intr.); -- gamara u (gamr) to flood, inundate (ھ s.th., ھ ب s.th. with), overflow (ھ s.th.); to douse, cover (ھ s.th., ب with a liquid), pour a liquid (ب) over s.th. (ھ); to lay, soak (ھ في s.th. in a liquid); to immerse, steep, submerge, place, embed ( ه ھ، في s.o. s.th. in(to); esp. fig.: in(to) an
 environment, an atmosphere); to cover, 683 bury (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to bestow liberally, lavish, heap, load (ه ب upon s.o. s.th.), shower (ه ب s.o. with); to fill, pervade (ه s.o., ھ the heart; of feeling.) III to plunge (blindly), throw o.s. (headlong) (في or ھ into); to venture; to risk (ب s.th.)
│ بنفسه غامر to engage in daring adventures, risk one’s life VIII to cover, bury, engulf, swallow (ھ s.th.)
غمر gamr flooding, overflowing, submersion, inundation; (pl. غمار gimār, غمور gumūr) deluge, flood (also fig.); all- engulfing, flooding, overflowing (water); of overflowing liberality, lavishly openhanded, generous; -- gamr and gumr (pl. اغمار agmār) inexperienced, green, gullible, simple, ingenuous
غمرة gamra pl. gamarāt, غمار gimār deluge, flood, inundation; (emotional) exuberance; pl. غمار flood (fig., e.g., of events); adversities, hardships, ups and down, (of life, of battle, etc.); abundance, profusion (e.g., of knowledge) │ غمرات الموت g. a1-maut mortal throes
غمر gumr pl. اغمار agmār armfull
غمار gimār risk, hazard
مغامرة mugāmara pl. -āt a hazardous, or foolhardy, undertaking; adventure; risk, hazard
غامر gāmir overflowing, all-engulfing, all-encompassing; plentiful, copious, abundant; desolate, waste, empty (land)
مغمور magmūr obscure, unknown
مغامر mugāmir reckless, foolhardy; adventurer
غمز gamaza i (gamz) to feel, touch, palpate (ه ھ ب s.o., s.th. with); to make a sign, to signal (ه ب to s.o. with); to beckon with one’s eyes, wink (ه at s.o.); to twinkle, blink (ب with one’s eyes); to slander, calumniate (على or ب s.o.) │ غمز الجرس (jarasa) to press the bell button, ring the bell; قناته غمز (qanātahū) to sound
s.o. out, probe into s.o., feel s.o.’s pulse VI to signal to one another, wink at one another VIII to detract (ھ from s.th.), belittle, decry, disparage (ھ s.th.)
غمز gamza pl. -āt sign, signal, hint, wink (with the eye), twinkle; taunt, gibe
غمازة gammāza dimple
غميزة gamīza failing, fault, shortcoming, blemish (of character)
مغمز pl. مغامز magāmiz  failing, fault, shortcoming. blemish (of character); weakness, weak spot, s.th. which arouses doubt, invites comment, taunts, and the like
غمس gamasa i (gams) to dip, plunge, steep, immerse, submerse, link (ه ھ، في s.o., s.th. in) II = I; VII to be dipped, be plunged, become immersed, be submersed, be sunk; to plunge, throw o.s. (في into) VIII = VII
غموس gamūs ominous, calamitous, disastrous
مغموس magmūs immersed (ب or في in)
غمص gamaṣ i (gamṣ) to esteem lightly, belittle, undervalue, despise, hold in contempt (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.)
غمص agmaṣ  blear-eyed
غمض gamuḍa u and gamaḍa u (غموض gumūḍ) to be hidden, be concealed, hide; to close (eye); to be obscure, dark, abstruse, recondite, difficult to comprehend II to make (ھ s.th.) obscure, abetruse, recondite, difficult to comprehend; to close, shut (عن عينيه (‘ainaihi one’s eyes to, over, toward, or in the face of); to sleep, be asleep │ القذى على جفونه غمض (jufūnahū, qaḍā) see قذى IV to blur, dim ( عن عينيه ‘ainaihi s.o.’s eye for), make s.o. blind to; to close, shut (عن عينيه one’s eyes to, 684 over, على على toward. in the face of); to pretend not to see (عن s.th.), feign blindness (عن to), overlook (عن s.th.), wink, connive (عن at); to hear, stand, tolerate (على عن، s.th.) │ عينيه من اغمض (‘ainaihi) to close, one’s eyes, refuse to see VIII to close, be closed (eye) VIII do.; to sleep, be asleep
غمض gumḍ sleep
غمضة gamḍa twinkle, blink, wink │ في عين غمضة in a moment, in a jiffy
غماض gimāḍ twinkle, blink, wink
 غموض gumūḍ obscureness, obscurity, ambiguity, abstruseness, reconditeness, mystery, inscrutability; inexplicability, lack of clarity, vagueness, uncertainty, incertitude
غموضة gumūḍa obscureness, obscurity, abstruseness, reconditeness
اغمض agmaḍ  obscurer, more cryptic
غامض gāmiḍ pl. غوامض gawāmiḍ  hidden, concealed; obscure, dark, ambiguous, abstruse, recondite, difficult to comprehend; inscrutable, cryptic(al), mysterious, enigmatic(al)
غامض gāmiḍ pl. غوامض gawāmiḍ  unsolved problem, riddle, enigma, mystery │ افكاره غوامض s.o.’s innermost thoughts
غمط gamaṭa i and gamiṭ a (gamṭ) to despise, hold in contempt, esteem lightly, belittle, undervalue (ه s.o.); to be ungrateful (ھ for s.th.) │ حقه غمطه (ḥaqqahū) to encroach upon s.o.’s rights, refuse to recognize s.o.’s rights
غمغم gamgama to mumble, mutter
غمغمة gamgama pl. غماغم gamāgim  cry, battle cry
غمق gamiqa a (gamaq), gamaqa u and
gamuqa u to be damp, moist, wet
غامق gāmiq  dark (color)
غملج gamlaj fickle, inconstant, unstable
غمالج gimlāj fickle, inconstant, unstable
غمى gamā i (gamy) to provide with a roof, to roof (ھ a house); pas.: عليه غمي (gumiya) to swoon, faint, lose consciousness II to blindfold IV pass. عليه اغمي (ugmiya) to swoon, faint, lose consciousness
غمي gamy swoon, faint, unconsciousness
اغماء I igrmā’ swoon, faint, unconsciousness
□ استغمائية (eg.; pronounced istugummāya): االسغماية لعبة la‘bat al-ist. blindman’s buff
عليه مغمى magmīy, mugman ‘alaihi in a swoon, unconscious
غن ganna (1  pers. perf. ganintu) a (gann, غنة gunna) to speak through the nose, speak with a nasal twang, nasalize
غن gann nasal pronunciation, nasalization
غنة gunna nasal pronunciation, nasalization; (pl. -āt) nasal sound, twang; sound (also, e.g., of complaint, of regret)
اغن agann , f. غناء gannā’  nasal; melodious, pleasant, sonorous (voice); luxuriant, lush, gorgeous (of a garden)
غنج ganija a (gunj) to coquet, flirt, play the coquette (woman) V do.
غنج gunj coquetry, flirtation, dalliance, coquettish behavior
غنج ganija coquettish, flirtatious (woman); a coquette
مغناج mignāj coquettish, flirtatious
غندر II tagandara to play the dandy, act like a fop
غندر gundur fat, plump, chubby
غندور gundūr pl. غنادرة ganādira (eg.) dandy, fop 685
غندقجي (eg.) gundaqgī armorer, gunsmith
غنغرينا gangarīnā gangrene (med.)
غنم ganima a (gunm, ganm, ganam, غنيمة ganīma) to gain booty; to take as (war) booty, capture, gain, obtain (ھ s.th.); to pillage, plunder, sack, loot II to give (in a disinterested manner) (ه ھ to s.o. s.th.), bestow (ه ھ on s.o. s.th.), grant (ه ھ
s.o. s.th.) IV to give as booty (ه ه ھ to s.o. s.th.) VIII to take as (war) booty, capture ( ھ s.th.) │ الفرصة اغتنم (furṣa) to seize, or take, the opportunity, avail o.s. of the opportunity X الفرصة اغتنم = الفرصة استغنم
غنم gunm spoils, booty, loot, prey; gain, profit, advantage, benefit
غنم ganam (coll.) pl. اغنام agnam sheep (and goats), small cattle
غنام gannām shepherd
غنيمة ganīma pl. غنائم ganā’im  spoils, booty, loot, prey │ غنيمة easy prey; راض باإلياب الغنيمة من (rāḍin, iyāb) (content with returning without booty, i.e.) glad to have saved one's skin; باإلياب الغنيمة من اقتنع
 (iqtana‘a) to have to return empty-handed, with nothing accomplished
مغنم magnam pl. مغانم magānim  spoils, booty, loot, prey; gain, profit, advantage, benefit
غانم gānim successful │ غانما سالما عاد (sāliman gāniman) approx.: he returned safe and sound
غني ganiya a (ginan, غناء ganā’) to be free from want, be rich, wealthy; not to need, be able to spare (عن s.o., s.th.), be able to dispense (عن with), manage, be able to do (عن without), have no need (عن for), be in no need (عن of) II to sing (ب or ھ s.th., ه ھ to s.o. s.th.), chant (ب or. s.th.); to sing the praises (ب of s.o.), eulogize, extol (ب s.o.) IV to make free from want, make rich, enrich (ه s.o.); to suffice (عن or , s.o. or for s.o.), be sufficient, be enough, be adequate, do (عن or ه for s.o.), be of use, be of help (عن or ه to s.o.), avail, profit, benefit, help (عن or ه s.o.); to satisfy, content (عن s.o.); to be a substitute or set off (عن to s.o.), make dispensable or superfluous (عن for s.o. s.th.); to make up (عن for s.th.), be a substitute (عن for s.th.); to dispense, free, relieve (ه عن s.o. of s.th.), spare, save (ه عن s.o. s.th.); to protect, guard, help (عن ھ s.o. against) │ شيئا (عنه) اغنى ما to be of no use, be of no avail (to s.o.); فتيال يغني ال (yugnī) it is of no use at all (عن to s.o.), it doesn’t help (عن s.o.) a bit, it isn’t worth a farthing V to sing, chant (ب s.th.); to sing the praises (ه or ب of s.o., of s.th.); to eulogize, praise, extol (ب s.o.) VIII to become rich, gain riches (ب by) X to become rich; not to need, be able to spare (عن s.o., s.th.), he able to dispense (عن with), manage, be able to do (عن without), have no need (عن for), be in no need (عن of); to get by, do, manage, be satisfied (ب with) │ يستغنى ال (yustagnā) indispensable
غنى ginan wealth, affluence, riches │ ال عنه غنى indispensable (ل for); غني عنه له ما he cannot dispense with it, he cannot do without it; عنه غني في ھو he can dispense with it, he does not need it; عنه غني في كان to forgo, renounce s.th., dispense with s.th., be in no need of s.th., not to need s.th., need not do s.th.
ما له عنه غنية = ما له عنه ginya: gunya, غني (ginan) غني
غني ganīy pl. اغنياء agniyā’ rich (ب in), wealthy, prosperous, well-to-do │ الحر غني
g. al-glarb war profiteer; الحرب عن غني (bayān) self-evident, self-explanatory; it is self-evident, it goes without saying (ان that) 686 غناء ganā’ wealth, affluence, riches; sufficiency, adequacy; ability, capability; use, avail, usefulness, utility ( عن for) │ فيه غناء ال (ganā’a) useless; it is insufficient, inadequate, not enough, it is no good, it is to little avail, it is of little use; عنه غناء له (ganā’un), عنه غناء في ھو he can dispense with it, he does not need it
غناء ginā’ singing, song
غنائي ginā’ī singing-, song- (in compounds), vocal │ غنائية حفلة (ḥafla) song recital, concert of vocal music
غن see gannā’  غناء
اغنية ugnīya (ignīya), ugniya (igniya) pl.
-āt, اغان agānin song, melody, tune, lay
مغنى magnan pl. مغان magānin
habitation; (eg.) villa
غانية gāniya pl. -āt, غوان gawānin pretty girl, beautiful woman, belle, beauty
مغن mugannin (male) singer, vocalist, chanter
مغنية muganniya (female) singer, vocalist, songstress, chanteuse
غيھب gaihab pl. غياھب gayāhib  darkness, dark, duskiness; gloom
غوث IV to help, succor (ه s.o.), go to the aid (ه of s.o.) X to appeal for help (ه or ب to s.o., على against), seek the aid (ه or ب of s.o., على against); to call for help
غوث gaut call for help; help, aid, succor
غياث giyāt/ help. aid, succor
وكالة اغاثة │ succor aid, igāta/help, اغاثة l- )>(li-l-umamiالالجئين )التابعة لألمم المتحدة and Relief Nations United muttaḥda) UNRWA Agency, Works
استغاثة istigāta appeal for aid; call for help
مغيث mugīt helper
 غور) غار) gāra u (gaur) to penetrate deeply (في into); -- gāra u a (gaur) to fall in, link in, become hollow (eyes, and the like); to seep away. ooze away (water); to dry up (spring) II to fall in, link in, become hollow (eyes, and the like); to seep away, ooze away (water) IV to travel in the lowlands; to make a predatory incursion, make a foray (على into s.o.’s territory); to raid, invade (على a country); to attack (على s.o., s.th.); to commit aggression (على against a nation)
غور gaur pl. اغوار agwār bottom; declivity, depression; depth (also fig.); الغور designation of that part of the Syrian Graben which constitutes the Jordan valley │ الغور بعيد deep; profound, unfathomable
غار gar pl. اغوار agwār, غيران gīrān cave, cavern; -- (coll.; n. un. ة) laurel tree, bay
غارة gara pl. -āt predatory incursion, raid, invasion, inroad, foray; attack (على on); a certain gait of camels │ جوية غارة (jawwīya) air raid; متوالية or متواصلة غارات (mutawāṣila, mutawāliya) rolling attacks, attacks in waves; على غارة شن (šanna) to attack s.o. or s.th., launch an attack on
مغار magār cave, cavern; grotto
مغارة magāra pl. -āt, مغاور magāwir ,
مغاير magāyir  cave, cavern; grotto
مغوار migwār pl. مغاوير magawīr  fleet, swift-running (horse); making raids or attacks, raiding, aggressive; bold, daring, audacious; pl. مغاوير commandos, shock troops (Syr., mil.)
اغارة igāra pl. -āt attack (على on)
غائر gā’ir low-lying; sunk, hollow (of the eyes)
مغير mugīr assailant, raider, aggressor
غوريال gurillā gorilla
غازي غاز، look up alphabetically
غويشة (eg.) guwēša pl. -āt, غوايش gawāyiš 
glass bracelet, bangle
غوص) غاص) gāṣa u (gauṣ, مغاص magāṣ, غياص giyāṣ, غياصة giyāṣa) to plunge (في into), become immersed, submerge (في in), dive (في into; على for); to practice pearl-fishery
II	to make (ه s.o.) dive (في into), plunge, immerse, submerse (ه في s.o. in)
غويص gawīṣ deep
غواص gawwaṣ pl. -ūn diver; pearl diver غواصة gawwāṣa pl. -āt submarine مغاص magāṣ diving place │ اللؤلؤ مغاص
m. al-lu’lu’ pearl diving, pearl-fishery
 غوط II to deepen, make deeper (ھ a well) V to evacuate the bowels, relieve nature
غوط gauṭ pl. غوط gūṭ, اغواط agwāṭ, غياط giyāṭ, غيطان gīṭān cavity, hollow, depression
الغوطة al-gūṭa name of the fertile oasis on the south side of Damascus
غويط gawīṭ deep
غائط gā’iṭ human excrements, feces
 غوطى gūṭī Gothic
غاغة gāga mob, rabble, riffraff; noise, clamor, din, tumult
غوغاء gaugā’  mob, rabble, riffraff; noise, clamor, din, tumult
غول) غال) gāla u (gaul) to take (away) unawares, snatch, seize, grab (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to destroy (ه s.o.) VIII = I; to assassinate, murder (ه s.o.)
غال gāl pl. -āt (syr.) padlock
غول gūl usually fem., pl. اغوال agwāl, غيالن gīlān ghoul, a desert demon appearing in ever varying shapes; demon, jinni, goblin, sprite; ogre, cannibal; calamity, disaster
قتله غيلة │ assassination gīla غيلة
(gīlatan) to assassinate s.o.
اغتيال igtiyā1 pl. -āt murder(ing), assassination
غائلة gā’ila pl. غوائل gawā’il  calamity, disaster; ruin, havoc, danger
غوى gawā i (غي gayy, غواية gawāya) to stray from the right way, go astray, err (in one’s actions); to misguide, mislead, lead astray (ه s.o.), seduce, tempt, entice, lure, induce (ه ب s.o. to do s.th.); gawiya a to covet, desire, like II to misguide, mislead, lead astray, tempt, seduce, entice, lure, allure (ه s.o.) IV = II X to misguide, mislead, lead
 astray (ه s.o.); to tempt, seduce, entice, lure, bait, ensnare, beguile, win (ه ب s.o. with)
غي gayy trespassing, transgression, offense, error, sin; seduction, temptation, enticement, allurement
غية gayya, gīya pl. -āt error, sin; taste, inclination, liking
غواية gawāya error, sin; seduction, temptation, enticement, allurement
اغوية ugwiya pl. اغاوى agāwīy pitfall, trap
اغواء igwā’ seduction, temptation, enticement, allurement
غاو gāwin tempter, seducer, enticer, allurer; (pl. غواة guwāh) amateur, fan, lover, dilettante, dabbler
مغويات pl. mugawwāh مغواة
mugawwayāt pitfall, trap
غى II to hoist (ھ a flag)
غاية gāya pl. -āt extreme limit; utmost degree, the outmost, extremity; aim, goal, end, objective, intention, intent, design, purpose, destination (of a journey) │ لغاية (with foll. genit.) as far as, up to, to the extent of, until, till; للغاية extremely, very (much); ٨٨٦ الجمال في غاية كان (gāyatan, jamāl) to be of extraordinary beauty; الغاية الواسطة تبرر (tubarriru l-wāsitata) the end justifies the means; لغايته انطلق to head or set out for one’s destination
غوي see غية and غى
O غائية gā’īya finality (philos.)
غيب) غاب) gāba i (gaib, غيبة gaiba, غياب giyāb, غيبوبة gaibūba, مغيب magīb) to be or remain absent, be or stay away; to absent o.s. withdraw (عن from), leave (عن s.o., s.th.); to vanish (عن from s.o.’s sight, from s.o., from s.th.); to disappear, be swallowed up (في in); to hide, be hidden, be concealed (عن from); -- (مغيب magīb) to set, go down (sun, and the like) │ غاب
باله عن الشيء the matter has slipped from his memory, he has forgotten the matter; صوابه عن غاب (ṣawābihī) to lose consciousness, faint, swoon, become unconscious; الوجود عن غاب do.; عنه تغيب ال الشمس (šamsu) it is not veiled in darkness
II to lead away, take away, carry away, remove (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to cause (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) to disappear; to hide, conceal (ھ، عن ه s.o., s.th. from); to make (ه s.o.) forget everything, make (ه s.o.) oblivious of everything │ الوجود عن غيبه it drove him out of his mind; الثرى غيبه (tarā) the earth covered, or buried, him V to be absent, be away, stay away (عن from s.o., from s.th.); to be not present, be not there; to play truant, play hooky (عن from school) VIII to slander, calumniate (ه s.o.) X to use s.o.’s (ه) absence for maligning him, backbite (ه s.o.); to slander, calumniate (ه s.o.)
غيب gaib absence; hidden, concealed, invisible; -- (pl. غيوب guyūb) that which is hidden, the invisible; that which is transcendental, the supernatural; divine secret │ غيبا gaiban or الغيب ظھر عن (ẓahri l-g.) by heart, from memory; الغيوب عالم ‘allām al-g. he who thoroughly knows the invisible, or transcendental, things = God; الغيب عالم ‘ālam al-g. the invisible world; الغيب بظھر bi-ẓahri l-g. behind s.o.’s back, insidiously, treacherously; الى الغيب بعين نظر (bi-‘aini l-g.) to foresee, foreknow, divine s.th.
غيبي gaibī secret, hidden, invisible
غابة gāba pl. -āt, غاب gāb (coll.) low ground, depression, hollow; forest, wood, copse, thicket; jungle; reed │ الھندي الغاب (hindī) bamboo
غيبة gaiba absence; concealment, invisibility
غيبة gāba slander, calumniation, calumny
غياب giyāb absence, being away; setting (of the sun)
غيابي giyābī: غيابي حكم (ḥukm) judgment by default (jur.); غيابيا giyābīyan in absence, in absentia (jur.)
غيابة gayāba pl. -āt bottom, depth (of a well, of a dungeon, of a ditch, and the like)
غيبوبة gaibūba swoon, faint, unconsciousness; trance, daze, stupor
مغيب magīb absence; setting (of the sun)
 تغيب tagayyub absence, nonattendance, being away, staying away, truancy
اغتياب igtiyāb slander, calumniation, defamation; gossip about (genit.)
غائب gā’ib pl. -ūn, غيب guyyab, غياب guyyāb absent, not present, not there; hidden, concealed, unseen, invisible; third person (gram.)
مغيبات mugayyibāt narcotics, stupefacients, anesthetics
مغيب mugayyab hidden, concealed, invisible; pl. المغيبات al-mugayyabāt the hidden, transcendental things, the divine secrets 689
مغيب mugib and مغيبة woman whose husband is absent, grass widow
متغيب mutagayyib absent (عن from)
مغتاب mugtāb slanderer, calumniator
ghetto غيتو
غيث) غاث) gaja i (gait) to water with rain (ھ s.th.), send rain (ه ,ھ upon s.o. upon s.th., of God)
 agyāt اغياث guyūt, غيوث pl. gait غيث
(abundant) rain
غيد VI to walk with a graceful, swinging gait
غيد gayad delicacy, slender shapeliness, tenderness, softness (of a woman)
غادة gāda pl. -āt young girl, young lady
gīd غيد  , gaidā’ غيداء agyād , اغياد
young and delicate; الغيد the young ladies
غير) غار) gāra a (غيرة gaira) to be jealous (من of); to display zeal, vie (على for); to be solicitous (على about. for); to guard or protect jealously (من على s.o., s.th. from) II to alter, modify, make different (من or ھ s.th.), change (ھ s.th.) III to be dissimilar, be different, differ; to be in contrast (ه ,ھ to), be unlike s.o. or s.th. (ه ,ھ); to change (ھ e.g., a garment); to interchange, exchange (بين between); to haggle, bargain, chaffer (ه with s.o.); to vie, compete (ه with s.o.) IV to make jealous (ه s.o.) V to be altered, be modified, be changed, change, alter, vary, undergo an alteration or change VI to differ, be different, be heterogeneous
غير gair other than (with dependent genit.), different from, unlike, no, not, non-, un-, in-, dis-; (prep.) gaira except, save, but │ الغير the others, fellow men, neighbors; ذلك وغير وغيره، and the like, and so forth, and so on, et cetera; and others, and other things, et alii, et alia; غير ال and غير ليس (gairu) (and) that’s all, nothing else, no more, nothing but, only, merely, solely; ان غير gaira anna except that ..., however, but, yet, ...though; واحد غير gaira wāḥidin more than one, several; مرة غير gaira marratin, more than once, quite often, frequently; بغير bi-gairi or غير من gairi without; (غير في (ما fī gairi (mā) without (generally followed
by abstract noun), ترو غير في (tarawwin) without thinking, unhesitatingly; ما غير في تھيب (tahayyubin) without fear; غير على
منه معرفة (ma‘rifatin) or منه علم غير من (‘ilmin) without his knowing or having known it, without his knowledge, unwittingly
غيري gairī altruist
غيرية gairīya altruism
ad-dahr g. غير الدھر giyar, غير
vicissitudes of fate
غيرة gaira jealously; zeal, fervor, earnest concern, vigilant care, solicitude ( على for); sense of honor, self-respect
غيور gayūr pl. غير guyur (very) jealous; zealous, fervid, eager (على in, in the pursuit of), keen, eagerly intent (على on), earnestly concerned (على with), enthusiastic (على for)
غياري pl. gairā, غيرى f. gairān , غيران
gayāra = غيور
تغيير tagyīr pl. -āt changing, alteration, modification, variation; change, replacement, relief
تغيير tagyīra pl. تغاييرtagāyīr  exchange, interchange, change, replacement; lending of books and manuscripts sheet by sheet (one malzama after the other; eg.)
غيار giyār exchange, interchange, change, replacement; (pl. -āt) dressing, bandage (of a wound) │ الغيار قطع qiṭa‘ al-
g. spare parts
 تغير tagayyur pl. -āt alteration, variation, change
indecent, مغاير لآلداب mugāyir: مغاير immoral
متغير mutagayyir changeable, variable, liable to change or alteration │ مغير تيار (tayyār) alternating current (el.)
(غاض (غيض gāḍa i (gaiḍ, مغاض magāḍ) to decrease, diminish, recede, become less, dwindle away │ لونه غاض (launuhū) his face lost all color, he turned pale
غيض gaiḍ prematurely born fetus
اغياض giyāḍ, غياض -āt, pl. gaiḍa غيضة
agyāḍ thicket, jungle
غيط gaiṭ pl. غيطان gīṭān field
غيط) غاظ) gāẓa i (gaiẓ) to anger, enrage, infuriate, irritate, exasperate, vex, gall (ه s.o.) II and IV = I; V to become
furious, become angry (من with s.o., at s.th.) VII and VIII = V
غيظ gaiẓ wrath, anger, ire, exasperation, fury, rage
اغتياظ igtiyāẓ wrath, anger, ire, exasperation, fury, rage
منغاظ mungāẓ angry, irate, furious, enraged
مغتاظ mugtāẓ angry, irate, furious, enraged
  غيل gīl pl. اغيال agyāl thicket
غال gāl pl. -āt (syr.) padlock
غول see gīlān غيالن and gīla غيلة  
غيم) غام) gāma i (gaim) to become cloudy, become overcast (sky); to become fogged, become blurred II do.; to form clouds; to billow, float, waft (smoke) IV agāma and agyama = I
غيم gaim (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. غيوم guyūm
غيام giyām clouds; mist, fog
غائم gā’im clouded, overcast; cloudy
متغيم mutagayyim clouded, overcast
 غين gain pl. -āt, غيون guyūn, اغيان agyān name of the letter غ
غينة gaina dimple on the cheek
pig guinea (kinzīr) خنزير غيني gīnī: غيني  
Gīniyā غينيا الجديدة │ Guinea gīniya غينيا Guinea New l-jadīda
غھب see غيھب



ف
 ف abbreviation of فدان faddān (a square measure)
 ف fa (conj.) then, and then; and so, thus, hence, therefore; but then, then however; for, because; (with subjective:) so that │ فيوما يوما (yauman) day after day, day by day; فشيئا شيئا (šai’an) gradually, step by step; فقتلوه امر (fa-qatalūhu) he ordered him to be killed
فان fa-inna (with foll. suffix or noun in acc.) for, because
فاء name of the letter ف
fabārik  فبارك -āt, pl. فابريكة and fābrīqa فابريقة
factory, plant
فأت VIII to tell lies (على about); to take violent measures (على against); to violate (على a duty, etc.); pass. افتئت uftu’ita to 691 die suddenly │ برئيه افتأت (bi-ra’yihī) to act on one’s own judgment
افتآت ifti’āt oppression, violence
فاتورة (It. fattura) fātūra pl. فواتير fawātīr 
invoice, bill
الفاتيكان al-fātīkān, al-vatikān the Vatican
فؤاد fu’ād pl. افئدة af’ida heart
فؤادية fu’ādīya “Fuad cap”, summer field-cup of the Egyptian Air Force (1939)
فأر fa’r (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. فئران fi’rān mouse; rat
فار fār (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. فيران fīrān mouse; rat
فارة fāra (= فأرة fa’ra) mouse; (pl. -āt) plane (tool)
فارس fāris  Persia, also فارس بالد  فارسي fārisī Persian; a Persian
فاروز fārūz turquoise
فازلين fazlīn, vazlīn vazeline
 فأس fa’s f., pl. فؤوس fu’ūs, افؤس af’us ax, hatchet; hoe
fa’s فأس = fās فاس 
 فاس fās  Fez or Fès (city in Morocco)
فاشستي fāšistī fascist(ic); a fascist
فاشستية fāšistīya fascism
فاشي fāšī fascist(ic); a fascist
فاشية fāšīya fascism
فاصوليا fāṣūliyā (eg.-syr.) common European bean (Phaseolus vulgaris L.; bot.)
فأفأ fa’fa’a to stammer, stutter
فاكون (Fr. wagon) fākōn pl. فواكين fawākīn 
(railroad) car, coach
فأل VI to regard as a good omen, as an auspicious beginning (ب s.th.); to be optimistic
فأل fa’l pl. فؤول fu’ūl, افؤل af’ul good omen, favorable auspice; optimistic outlook, hope; omen, auspice, sign │ قرأ الفأل to tell fortunes, predict the future
تفاؤل tafā’ul optimism
متفائل mutafā’il optimistic; optimist
فالس (Fr. valse) vals waltz
فالوذج fālūdaj a sweet made of flour and honey
فالوذجى fālūdajī soft and flabby, like
fālūdaj
فئام fi’ām group (of people)
فإن fa-inna see  ف fa
فانلة fanella and فانال pl. -āt flannel; undershirt; pl. فانالت fanellāt underwear, underclothing
فانوس fānūs pl. فوانيس fawānīs  lantern │ فانوس سحري (siḥrī) laterna magica, magic lantern; (slide) projector
فئة fi’a pl. -āt group, class; troop, band, party; platoon (of light arms; Syr., mil.); rate (of taxation), (tax) bracket; tax, rate, fee; price
فاوريقة fāwarīqa pl. فوارق fawārīq  factory plant
فيظ see )فائض(= fāyiẓ فايظ □ February fabrāyir فبراير
فبارك fabārik  (pl.) factories, plants
فت fatta u (fatt) to weaken, undermine, sap (في s.th.) │ ساعده في or عضده في فت (‘aḍudihī) to weaken s.o., sap s.o.’s strength, discourage, enervate s.o. II to crumble, fritter (ھ s.th.); to divide into small fragments (ھ s.th.) │ األكباد) القلب يفتت) (qalba) heartbreaking, heart-rending V to crumble, disintegrate, break up into fragments VII = V 692
فتة fatta a kind of bread soup
فتات futāt crumbs, morsels
فتيت fatīt crumbs, crumbled bread
فتيتة fatīta a kind of bread soup
فتأ fata’a a and فتئ fati’a a (with negation) not to cease, to be (ھ s.th.); فتئ fati’a a (فتء fat’) to desist, refrain (عن from), cease (عن doing s.th.), stop (عن s.th., doing s.th.) │ ما يفعل فتئ not to cease doing, do incessantly
فتح fataḥa a (fatḥ) to open (ھ s.th.); to turn on (ھ a faucet); to switch on, turn on (ھ an apparatus); to dig (ھ a canal); to build (ھ a road) ; to open, preface, introduce, begin (ھ s.th.); to conquer, capture (ھ s.th.); to reveal, disclose (على ھ to s.o. s.th.); to grant victory or success (ھ على to s.o. over or in s.th.; of God), give into s.o.’s (على) power (ھ s.th.; of God); to open the gates (of profit) (على to s.o.; of God); to infuse, imbue, inspire, endow (ب or على ھ s.o. with; of God); (gram.) to pronounce with the vowel a (ھ a consonant) │ البخت فتح (bakta) to tell fortunes; آخرھما على عينيه فتح (‘ainaihi) to open one’s eyes wide, stare wide-eyed; فتح الشھية (šahīyata) to stimulate the appetite II to open (ھ s.th.); (of a dower) to open III to address first (ه s.o.), speak first (ه to s.o.); to open the conversation or talk (ه في with s.o. about); to disclose (ھ or ه ب to
s.o. s.th.), let s.o. (ه) in on s.th. (ھ or ب) V to open, open up, unfold (intr.); to be opened (عن so that s.th. becomes perceptible); to be open, be responsive (heart) VII to open, open up, unfold (intr.); to be opened VIII to open, inaugurate (ھ s.th.); to introduce, preface, begin (ه ب s.th. with); to conquer, capture (ھ s.th.) X to begin, start, commence (ھ s.th.); to seek the assistance of God (على against), implore God for victory (على over)
 فتح opening; introduction, commencement, beginning │ االعتماد فتح opening of a credit, presentation of a letter of credit; -- (pl. فتوح futūḥ, فتوحات futūḥāt) conquest; victory, triumph; pl. فتوحات alms; donations, contributions (for a zāwiya; Tun.)
فتحة the vowel point a (gram.)
فتحة futḥa pl. فتح futaḥ, -āt opening, aperture, breach, gap, hole; sluice
فتاح fattāḥ opener (of the gates of profit, of sustenance; one of the attributes of God)
فتاحة fattāḥa pl. -āt can opener
مفتاح miftāḥ pl. مفاتيح mafātīḥ  key (to a door, of a keyboard, esp. that of a piano); switch (el., railroad); lever, pedal (of a vehicle); knob (on a radio); stop (of a wind instrument); valve (of a trumpet); peg, pin (of a stringed instrument)
مفتاحجي miftāḥjī (railroad) switchman
مفاتحة mufātaḥa opening of a conversation
افتتاح iftitāḥ opening, inauguration; introduction, beginning │ االفتتاح ليلة lailat al-ift. première, opening night
افتتاحي iftitāḥī opening, introductory, preliminary, prefatory, proemial; inaugurational │ افتتاحي مبلغ (mablag) opening bid, lowest bid (at auctions); فصل افتتاحي (مقال) (faṣl, maqāl) and افتتاحية مقالة (maqāla) editorial, leading article, leader; ل افتتاحية يلة (laila) première, opening night
استفتاحية iftiftāḥīya editorial, leading article, leader; overture (mus.)
استفتاح istiftāḥ start, beginning, commencement, inception, incipience; earnest money, handsel
فاتح fātiḥ opener; beginner; conqueror, victor; light (color) │ البخت فاتح f. al-bakt fortuneteller; فاتح ارزق light-blue 693
فاتحة fātiḥa pl. فواتح fawātiḥ  start, opening, beginning, commencement, inception, incipience; introduction, preface, preamble, proem │ الفاتحة or فاتحة الكتاب name of the first sura
الباب مفتوح │ open opened, maftūḥ مفتوح wide is door the (miṣrā‘aihi) على مصراعيه open
مفتح mufattaḥ appetizing; (pl. -āt) aperitif
مفتتح muftataḥ start, beginning, commencement, inception, opening, inauguration
 فتر fatara u (فتور futūr) to abate, subside; to become listless, become languid, languish, flag, slacken; to cool off, become tepid, become lukewarm (water); to slacken, flag, become lax, become remiss, let up ( عن in) II to cause (ھ s.th.) to subside, abate, allay, mitigate, ease, soothe (ھ s.th.); to make languid, make listless, exhaust, slacken. weaken, sap, enfeeble (
ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to make tepid (ھ water) IV to make languid, make listless, exhaust, Blacken, weaken, sap, enfeeble (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) V to become listless, become languid, languish, flag, slacken; to become tepid, become lukewarm (water)
فتر fitr pl. افتار aftār small span (the space between the end of the thumb and the end of the index finger when extended); corner
فترة fatra lassitude, languor, listlessness, slackness, weakness, feebleness, debility; tepidity, indifference, coolness (of a feeling); -- (pl. fatarāt) interval of time, intermission, pause; period, spell, while │ االنتقال فترة transition period; واخرى فترة بين (wa-ukrā) now and then, from time to time; الفترة بعد الفترة في at certain intervals, now and then, off and on, once in a while
فتور futūr lassitude, languor, listlessness, slackness, laxity, slackening, flagging; tepidity
فاتر fātir languid, weak, feeble, listless, slack, loose, flabby; dull, listsless, stagnant (stock exchange); tepid, lukewarm
متفتر mutafattir intermittent
 فاتورة pl. فواتر look up alphabetically
فتش II to examine (thoroughly), scrutinize, search, investigate, explore (ھ s.th.); to look, search (ھ into s.th.); to inquire (عن
 about, after), look, search (عن for); to supervise, superintend, control, inspect ( على or ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to be in charge, exercise supervision, control, or inspection (على of)
فتاش fattāš thorough examiner, investigator, explorer, researcher
تفتيش taftīš pl. تفاتيش tafātīš  examination, scrutiny, searching, search; investigation; inquiry, research, exploration; supervision, superintendence, control, charge; inspection; survey, review; controlling body, board of control; inquisition; circle of irrigation, irrigation district, also الري تفتيش t. ar-rīy (Eg.) │  جوي تفتيش (jawwī) aerial inspection
تفتيشي taftīšī išnvestigational, investigatory, examining, examinatory
مفتش mufattiš inspector, supervisor │ بيطري مفتش (baiṭarī) veterinary inspector (Eg.); الري مفتش m. ar-rīy irrigation inspector (Eg.)
مفتشية mufattišīya inspectorate
فتفت fatfata to speak secretly (الى to); to fritter, crumble (ھ s.th., esp. bread)
فتفوتة fatfūta pl. فتافيت fatāfīt  crumb, morsel (esp. of bread)
فتق fataqa u (fatq) to undo the sewing ( ھ of s.th., e.g., of a garment), unsew, unstitch, rip, rip open, tear apart, rend, slash, slit 694 open (ھ s.th.), │ الذھن فتق (dihna) to make s.o. see his way clear, cause s.o. to see things in their true light; الحيلة تفتق الضرورة (ḥīlata) necessity is the mother of invention; حيلة له فتقت futiqat lahū ḥīlatun a ruse came to his mind II to unsew, unstitch, rip, tear, etc. (= I; ھ s.th.) V to be unsewn, be unstitched (e.g., a garment), be ripped open, be torn apart, be rent, be slashed, be slit open; to bring forth, produce (عن s.th.); to hatch, contrive, devise (عن s.th., fig., of the mind) VII to be unsewn, be unstitched (e.g., a garment), be ripped open, be torn apart, be rent, be slashed, be slit open; to bring forth, produce (عن s.th.)
فتق fatq pl. فتوق futūq rip, rent, tear, cleft, crack, fissure, slit, slash; hole (e.g., in a stocking); hernia, rupture (med.) │
بالفتق مصاب (muṣāb) afflicted with hernia; person suffering from hernia
فتاق fitāq hernia, rupture (med.)
فتيق fatīq unstitched, ripped, ripped open, slit, rent, torn; sharp
مفتوق maftūq unstitched, ripped, ripped open, slit, rent, torn; afflicted with hernia
فتك fataka u i (fatk) to assassinate, murder, slay, kill (ب s.o.), destroy, annihilate (ب s.th.); to attack suddenly, assault (ب s.o.)
│ ذريعا فتكا به فتك (fatkan darī‘an) to cut off, destroy, wipe out, eradicate, extirpate, exterminate s.o.; to decimate, thin the ranka of ... (esp., said of a disease)
فتك fatk assassination, murder; destruction, annihilation
فتكة fatka pl. -āt devastation, ravage, havoc
فتاك fattāk deadly, lethal, murderous; of disastrous effect, wreaking havoc (ب on)
افتك aftak  deadlier, more destructive
فاتك fātik pl. فتاك futtāk assassin, murderer, killer
فتل fatala i (fatl) to twist together, twine, entwine, plait, throw (ھ s.th.); to spin (ھ s.th.) II to twist, twine, wreathe, wind, weave, plait (ھ s.th.); to splice (ھ a rope) V to be twisted, be twined, be plaited, be woven, be wound VII = V; to turn on one’s heel and leave, turn away (من from)
door the out slip to انفتل من الباب │
فتلة fatla (n. vic.) twist(ing), twining, plaiting; (eg.; pl. فتل fital) thread │ شمع الفتلة (šlammā‘a) to make off, make a getaway, beat it
فتيل fatīl twisted, twined, entwined, plaited, wreathed, wound, woven, coiled;
-- (pl. -āt, فتائل fatā’il) wick; gauze tampon; fuse, slow match, match cord │ ال فتيال يغني (yugnī) it is of no use at all (من to s.o.), it won’t help him (عنه) a bit, it isn’t worth a farthing; فتيال يجدي ال (yujdī) = ال فتيال يغني
فتيلة fatīla pl. -āt, فتائل fatā’il  wick; O filament of a light bulb
فتال fattāl ropemaker, cordmaker
 مفتول maftūl strapping, sturdy, husky; (watch) tower (Nejd) │ الساعد مفتول muscular, brawny, strong, husky, burly
فتن falana i (fatn, فتون futūn) to turn away (ه من
s.o. from); to subject to temptations or trials, seduce, tempt, entice, allure, beguile (ه s.o.); to enamor, charm, enchant, captivate, enthrall, enrapture, fascinate, infatuate (. s.o.); -- fatana i (fatn) to torture, torment (ه s.o.); to denounce (على s.o.), inform (على على against s.o.); pass. futina to be charmed, be enraptured, be infatuated (ب by), be enamored (ب of), be in love (ب with); to be crazy (ب over), be like mad (٥٩٦ ب after) IV to enamor, charm, enchant, captivate, enthrall, enrapture, fascinate, infatuate (ه s.o.) VIII to subject to temptations (ه s.o.); to be charmed, be tempted, be infatuated; act. iftatana and pass. uftutina: to be subjected to temptations, be lead from the right course; pass. uftutina = futina
فتنة fitna pl. فتن fitan temptation, trial; charm, charmingness, attractiveness; enchantment, captivation, fascination, enticement, temptation; infatuation; intrigue; sedition, riot, discord, dissension, civil strife
فتان fattān fascinating, captivating, enchanting, charming; tempter, seducer; denunciator, informer, slanderer
;jil alu.,,· more charming, more attractive, more delightful
مفاتن mafātin  charming qualities; charms; magic powers
فاتن fātin pl. فواتن fawātin  tempting, alluring, seductive, fascinating, captivating, enchanting, charming; tempter, seducer
مفتون maftūn fascinated, captivated, infatuated, enraptured, charmed (ب by); enamored (ب of), in love (ب with); madman, maniac
(فتو and فتى (فتي fatiya a (فتاء fatā’) to be youthful, young, adolescent IV to give a formal legal opinion (ه في to s.o. in or regarding; Isl. Law); to furnish (ه s.o.) with information (في about), expound, set forth (ه في to s.o. s.th.); to deliver an opinion (في about), decide by a legal
opinion (ب for or in favor of s.th.), state as a (legal) opinion (بان that) X to ask (ه s.o.) for a formal legal opinion (في in or regarding; Isl. Law); to ask (ه s.o.) for a formal opinion (في about), request information (ه في of s.o. about), seek s.o.’s (ه) counsel (في in, about), consult (ه في s.o. in, about), ask s.o.’s (ه) opinion (في about)
فتى fatan pl. فتيان futyān, فتية fitya youth, adolescent, juvenile, young man; slave; hero; pl. young people, adolescents, juveniles
فتاة fatāh pl. فتيات fatayāt young woman, (young) girl
فتاء fatā’ youth, adolescence
فتي fatīy youthful, juvenile, adolescent, young
فتية fatīya youthfulness, juvenility
fatāwā فتاوى fatāwin, فتاو pl. fatwā فتوى
futwa, formal legal opinion (Isl. Law)
فتيا futyā formal legal opinion (Isl. Law)
فتوة futūwa youth, adolescence; the totality of the noble, chivalrous qualities of a man, noble manliness, magnanimity, generosity, nobleheartedness, chivalry; designation of Islamic brotherhoods of the Middle Ages, governed by chivalrous precepts; name of several youth organizations in Arabic countries; (eg.; pl.
-āt) bully, brawler. rowdy, tough; racketeer (eg.)
افتاء iftā’ deliverance of formal legal opinions (Isl. Law); office of mufti (Isl. Law); deliverance of formal opinions, advising, advice, counseling
استفتاء istiftā’ request for a formal legal opinion (Isl. Law); consulting, consultation; referendum, plebiscite, also الشعب استفتاء ist. aš-ša‘b and شعبي استفتاء (ša‘bī)
مفت muftin pl. ·fl" deliverer of formal legal oplnions (Isl. Law); official expounder of Islamic law, mufti │ مفتي المصرية الديار (miṣrīya) Grand Mufti of Egypt; المفتي سماحة samāḥat al-m. (title of a mufti) His Eminence the Mufti
فثأ fata’a a (فثء fat’) to quench, still (ھ s.th., hunger, thirst, also fig.) 696
 فج fajja u (fajj): رجليه فج (rijlaihi) to straddle IV to stride, hurry
فج fajj pl. فجاج fijāj way, road between two mountains │ عميق فج كل من or فج كل من وصوب (wa-ṣaubin) from all sides, from all directions, from everywhere
فج fijj unripe, green (fruit); blunt, rude (speech)
فجأ faja’a and فجئ faji’a a (فجء faj’, فجأة faj’a, فجاءة fujā’a) and III to come suddenly, descend unexpectedly (ه upon s.o.), confront (ه s.o.) suddenly or unexpectedly, take (ه s.o.) by surprise, surprise (ه ب s.o. with), attack, assail (ه s.o.)
فجأة faj’atan suddenly, unexpectedly, inadvertently, unawares
فجاءة fujā’atan suddenly, unexpectedly, inadvertently, unawares
فجائي fujā’ī sudden, unexpected, surprising
mufāja’āt مفاجآت pl. mufāja’a مفاجأة
surprise
فاجئ fāji’ sudden, unexpected, surprising
مفاجئ mufāji’ sudden, unexpected, surprising; pl. مفاجئات surprising events, surprises
فجر fajara u (fajr) to cleave, break up, dig up ( ھ e.g., the ground); -- (فجور fujūr) to act immorally, sin, live licentiously, lead a dissolute life, indulge in debauchery; to commit adultery II to create an outlet or passage (ھ for water, and the like), let (ھ water, and the like) flow or pour forth; to split, cleave (ھ s.th.); to explode (ھ s.th.) IV to commit adultery V to gush out, spurt forth, break forth, break out, erupt, burst out VII = V; to go off, discharge, burst; to burst forth; to explode, detonate; to overflow (ب with); to descend suddenly, break in, rush in, swoop down (على upon)
فجر fajr dawn, daybreak, morning twilight; dawn (fig.), beginning, outset, start; (f.) morning prayer (Isl. Law)
فجور fujūr immorality, iniquity, depravation, dissolution, debauchery, licentiousness, profligacy, dissolute life, fornication, whoredom
تفجر tafajjur outbreak, outburst, eruption
انفجار infijār pl. -āt outbreak, outburst, eruption; explosion, detonation │ مواد االنفجار mawādd al-inf. explosives
انفجاري infijārī explosive, blasting (adj.)
فاجر fājir pl. فجار fujjār, فجرة fajara libertine, profligate, debauchee, roué, rake; adulterer; liar; insolent, impudent, shameless, brazen
فاجرة fājira pl. فواجر fawājir  adulteress; whore, harlot
متفجر mutafajjir explosive, blasting (adj.)
منفجر munfajir explosive, blasting (adj.)
فجع faja‘a a (faj‘) to inflict suffering and grief (ه upon s.o.), afflict, distress (ه s.o.); to make miserable (ه s.o., ب by bereaving him of s.o.) │ بولده فجع fuji‘a bi- waladihī he was stricken by the death of his eon II to torment, torture, distress, grieve (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) V to be or become painfully affected, be mentally distressed
فجعة faj‘a gluttony
فجاعة fajā‘a gluttony
فجوع fajū‘ painful, grievous, trying, distressing
فجيعة fajī‘a pl. فجائع fajā’i‘  misfortune, calamity, disaster 697
فجعان faj‘ān voracious, insatiable; glutton, ravenous eater
تفجع tafajju‘ agony, mental distress, affliction, suffering, grief
فاجع fāji‘ painful, grievous, trying, distressing
فاجعة fāji‘a pl. فواجع fawāji‘ misfortune, diluter, calamity; catastrophe; drama, tragedy
مفجعات mufajji‘āt horrors, terrors
تفجعن tafaj‘ana to eat greedily, ravenously, be gluttonous
فجعنة faj‘ana gluttony
فجفج fajfaja garrulous, loquacious; thoughtless chatterer, windbag; braggart, boaster, swaggerer
 فجل fujl (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. فجول fujūl radish (Raphanus sativus L.; bot.)
فجو) فجا) fajā u (fajw) to open (ه ھ door)
فجوة fajwa pl. fajawāt, فجاء fijā’ opening, aperture, breach, gap, interstice; (horisontal) tombstone
فح faḥḥa u i (faḥḥ, فحيح faḥīḥ) to hiss (snake), whistle (storm)
فحش faḥuša u (fuḥš) to be monstrous; to be excessive, exorbitant; to be detestable, abominable, atrocious, obscene, indecent, foul, shameless, impudent IV to use obscene language; to commit atrocities VI
= I and IV
فحش fuḥš monstrosity; abominableness, atrocity; obscenity, indecency; obscene language
فحشاء faḥšā’  monstrosity, abomination, atrocity, vile deed, crime; adultery, fornication, whoredom
فحاش faḥḥāš obscene, lewd, shameless in speech or action │ فحاش تأليف pornography
تفاحش tafāḥuš monstrosity, abominableness
فاحش fāḥiš monstrous; immoderate, excessive, exorbitant, absurd, preposterous, nonsensical; detestable, loathsome, abominable, atrocious, repugnant, disgusting; dirty, foul, vile, indecent, obscene; shameless, impudent
فاحشة fāḥiša harlot, whore, prostitute; -- (pl. فواحش fawāḥiš ) monstrosity, abomination, atrocity, vile deed, crime; adultery, fornication, whoredom
مفحشة mufḥiša harlot, whore
فحص faḥaṣa a (faḥṣ) to scratch up (ھ the ground); to examine (ه s.o., also medically, ھ s.th.), test (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), investigate (ھ s.th.), scrutinize (ھ, s.o., s.th.); to search (عن for), inquire (عن about, into s.th.), seek information (عن about) V to search (عن for), inquire (عن about, into s.th.), seek information (عن about); to examine (ھ s.th., ه s.o., medically)
فحص faḥš pl. فحوص fuḥūš test; examination (in general, school, medical);
(medical) checkup; investigation, scrutiny; search, inquiry
افحوص ufḥūṣ pl. افاحيص afāḥīṣ  dugout hollow in the ground in which a bird lays ito eggs, nesting place, breeding place
فحل X to become dreadful, terrible, momentous, serious, difficult (على for s.o.; affair), to get out of control, become excessive, become irreparable (damage)
فحل faḥl pl. فحول fuḥūl, فحولة fuḥūla male (of large animals), stallion; outstanding personality, luminary, star, 698 master; a paragon (of) │ الفحول الشعراء (šu‘arā’) the master poets
فحولة fuḥūla excellence, perfection
استفحال istifḥāl dreadfulness, terribleness, gravity, seriousness; difficulty
مستفحل mustafḥil dreadful, terrible; grave, serious; difficult; overwhelming, overpowerful, rampant, spreading dangerously
فحم faḥuma u (فحوم fuḥūm, فحومة fuḥūma) to be or become black; -- faḥama a (faḥm) to be dumfounded, nonplused, unable to answer II to blacken (with charcoal), make black (ه ھ، s.o. s.th.); to char, carbonize, reduce to charcoal (ھ s.th.) IV to dumfound, nonplus, strike dumb (ه s.o.); to silence (ه s.o.) with arguments; to put (ه s.o.) off brusquely, give s.o. (ه) the brush-off
فحم faḥm (coll.; n. un. ة) charcoal(s); coal(s); pl. فحومات fuḥūmāt coals, brands of coal │ حجري فحم (ḥajarī) soft coal, bituminous coal; حطب فحم ḥaṭab charcoal; قوالب فحم briquettes; كوك فحم (kōk) coke
فحمة faḥma pl. faḥamāt lump of coal │ الليل فحمة f. al-lail deep-black night; -- (pl. فحام fiḥām, فحوم fuḥūm) blackness
فحمي faḥmī black, coal-black
فحيم faḥīm black
فحام faḥḥām coal merchant, coal dealer; collier, miner
فاحم fāḥim black │ فاحم اسود aswad or السواد فاحم f. as-sawād coal, black, pitch, black, jet-black
 فحوى faḥwā or فحواه faḥwā  sense, meaning, signification, import; purport, tenor (of a letter, of a speech, etc.)
فخ fakk pl. فخاخ fakkāk, فخوخ fukūk: trap, snare فخت fakata a (fakt) to perforate, pierce (ھ s.th.) فخذ fakid, fakd, fikd f., pl. افخاذ afkād thigh; leg
(of mutton, etc.); (m.) subdivision of a tribe
فخذة fakda leg (of mutton, etc.)
فخذي fakidī, fakdī femoral
فخر fakara a (fakr, fakar, فخار fakār) to glory ( ب in), boast (ب of s.th.), brag (ب of). vaunt (ب s.th.); to pride o.s. (ب upon), be proud ( ب of); -- fakira a (falfa,) to despise, disdain III to vie in glory (ه with s.o.); to be proud (ب of), pride o.s. (ب upon), boast (ه ب before s.o. of) V to be proud, haughty VI and VIII = I fakara X to find (ھ s.th.) excellent
فخر fakr glory, pride; honor; vainglorious poetry (as a literary genre) │ فخر غير gaira fakrin or فخر وال wa-lā fakra I say this without boasting
فخري fakrī honorary, honoris causa
فخرة fukra glory, pride
فخار fakār glory, pride
فخور fakūr vainglorious, boastful, bragging; proud (ب of)
فخير fakīr boasting, bragging, swaggering, boastful
فخار fakkār (fired) clay; earthenware, crockery, pottery
فخاري fakkārī potter’s earthen; potter
فاخورة fākūra pottery, earthenware manufactory
فاخوري fākūrī potter
افخر afkar  more splendid, more magnificent
مفخرة mafkara pl. مفاخر mafākir  object of pride, s.th. to bout of; glorious deed, exploit, feat; glorious trait or quality 699
مفاخرة mufākara boasting, bragging, vainglory, pride
تفاخر tafākur boasting, bragging, vainglory
افتخار iftikār pride, vainglory, boasting, bragging
فاخر fākir proud, vainglorious, boastful, bragging; outstanding, excellent, first-rate, perfect, splendid, superb, glorious, magnificent; sumptuous, de luxe
مفاخر mufākir boastful, vainglorious, proud
مفتخر muftakir proud, vainglorious, boastful, bragging; outstanding, excellent, first-rate, perfect, splendid, superb, glorious, magnificent; sumptuous, de luxe
فخفخ fakfaka to be boastful, vainglorious; to boast, brag
فخفخة fakfaka ostentation, showiness, pageantry, pomp
فخم fakuma u (فخامة fakāma) to be stately, imposing, splendid, magnificent, grand II to intensify (ھ s.th.); to honor, treat with respect (ه s.o.), show deference (ه to); to pronounce emphatically, make emphatic ( ھ a consonant)
فخم fakm stately, imposing, splendid, superb, magnificent, grand, grandiose
فخامة fakāma stateliness, imposingness, imposing appearance; splendor, magnificence, eminence, high rank; title of the head of a nonmonarchic state; title of honor given to high-ranking foreign dignitaries, approx.: Highness, Excellency, = الدولة فخامة │ الفخامة صاحب f. ad-daula title of the President of the Republic (Syr., Leb.); الدولة رئيس فخامة do. (Syr., Leb.); الرئيس فخامة f. ar-ra’īs title of a foreign head of state, approx.: His Excellency, the President; المعتمد فخامة السامي f. al-mu‘tamad as-sāmī His Excellency, the High Commissioner
تفخيم tafkīm emphatic or velarized pronunciation of a consonant (phon.) │ آلة التفخيم amplifier (radio)
الحروف المفخمة │ honored mufakkam مفخم
the emphatics (phon.)
فدح fadaḥa a (fadḥ) to oppress, burden ( ه s.o.), weigh (ه upon s.o.) X to regard (ھ s.th.) as a heavy burden, as painful
فداحة fadāḥa oppressiveness, burdensomeness
 افدح afdaḥa  more oppressive, more burdensome, more serious, heavier
فادح fādiḥ burdensome, oppressive; grave, serious (mistake), heavy (loss), bad (physical defect)
fawādiḥ فوادح pl. fādiḥa فادحة
misfortune, calamity
فدخ fadaka a (fadk) to break, smash (ھ s.th.)
فدر fadar pl. فدور fudūr chamois
فدفد fadfad pl. فدافد fadāfid  wasteland, tract of desert land, desert
فدم fadama i to seal (ھ the mouth, an aperture)
فدم fadm pl. فدام fidām clumsy in speech; heavy-witted, sluggish, dull, stupid
فدن II to fatten, stall-feed (ھ s.th.)
فدان faddān pl. فدادين fadādīn  yoke of oxen; (pl. افدنة afdina) feddan, a square measure (Eg. = 4200.833 m )
فادن fādin pl. فوادن fawādin  plummet, plumb bob
فدى fadā i (fidan, فداء fidā’) to redeem, ransom (ه ھ، ب s.o., s.th. with or by); to sacrifice ( ه ب for s.o. s.th.) III to sacrifice, offer up ( ب s.th.) VI to 700 beware (من of), guard ( من against), get away, keep away (من or ھ from); to get rid (من or ھ of); to prevent, obviate, avert, avoid (من or ھ s.th.) VIII = I; to obtain (ھ s.th.) by sacrificing s.th. else (ب); to redeem o.s., ransom o.s. (ب with or by); to free o.s. (من from) │ افتداه بالنفس to sacrifice o.s. for s.o. or s.th., risk life and property for s.o. or s.th.
فدى fidan, fadan redemption, ransoming; ransom; sacrifice (with foll. genit.: for s.th., to save or liberate s.o. or s.th.) │ فداك جعلت (ju‘iltu) (lit.: may I be made your ransom, i.e.) oh, could I but sacrifice myself for you! للوطن فدى مات (waṭan) he died for his country
فدية fidya pl. فديات fidayāt, فدى fidan ransom; redemption (from the omission of certain religious duties, by a material donation or a ritual act; Isl. Law)
فداء fidā’ redemption, ransoming; ransom; price (one has to pay for s.th.), sacrifice (one makes for s.th.) │ كل جعل
فداءه شيء (fidā’ahū) he sacrificed or gave up everything for it
فدائي fidā’ī one who sacrifices himself (esp., for his country); esp. pl. فدائيون fighters who risk their lives recklessly, soldiers prepared to sacrifice their lives; fedayeen, commandos, shock troops (Eg.)
فدائية fidā’īya spirit of self-sacrifice
مفاداة mufādāh sacrifice
فاد fādin redeemer
مفدي mafdīy (prop., object of self- sacrifice) following the name of a king, also after وطن waṭan, عرش ‘arš, and the like, approx.: dearly beloved, dear
فذ fadd pl. افذاذ afdād, فذوذ fudūd alone, only, sole, single; singular, unique; uncommon, unusual, infrequent; pl. افذاذ extraordinary people
فذلكة fadlaka brief summary, résumé, survey, outline, abstract, epitome
فر farra i (farr, فرار firār, مفر mafarr) to flee, run away, run off, escape (من from) │ ھاربا فر (hāriban) to flee, take to one’s heels IV to put (ه s.o.) to flight VIII to open up or part (عن so that s.th. becomes visible); to bare, show (عن the teeth when smiling), reveal (عن s.th.); to shimmer, gleam
فرار firār flight
فرار furār: فراره عينه ‘ainuhū furāruhū (firāruhū) his outward appearance bespeaks his inner worth; you need only look at him to know what to think of him
فرار farrār fugitive, runaway, escaped; a fugitive, a runaway; deserter, defector; quicksilver, mercury
فريرة furrēra teetotum (eg.)
ال مفر منه │ escape flight, mafarr مفر
(mafarra) unavoidable, inevitable
فار fārr pl. -ūn, فارة fārra fugitive, fleeing; a fugitive
فرأ fara’ pl. افراء afrā’ wild ass, onager
فراء farā’ wild ass, onager │ في الصيد كل الفراء جوف kullu ṣaidin fī jaufi l-f. there are all kind, of game in the belly of the wild ass (proverbially of s.o. or s.th. that
 combine. all good qualities and advantages and makes everything else dispensable)
فراك (Fr. frac) firāk, frāk pl. -āt swallow-tailed coat, full dress, tails
فراولة faraula (from It. fragola) strawberry (eg.)
الفرات al-furāt the Euphrates; فرات sweet (water) 701
فرتيكة furtīka clasp, buckle (eg.)
فرج faraja i (farj) and II to open, part,  separate, cleave, split, gap, breach (ھ s.th.), make an opening, gap or breach (ھ in); to dispel, drive away (ھ s.th., e.g., grief, worried; to comfort, solace, relieve ( عن s.o.) II to show (ه على to s.o. s.th.) IV to leave (عن a place); to free, liberate, let free (عن s.o.), release (عن s.o., s.th.) V to be opened عن, be separated, be cleft, be split; to part, divide, move apart (e.g., a crowd so as to let s.o. pass; to be dispelled (grief, sorrow); to derive comfort (في or على from the light of), take pleasure, delight (في or على in looking at); to regard, view, observe, watch, inspect (على s.o., s.th.), look (على at s.o., at s.th.) VII to be opened, be separated, be cleft, be split; to open or part widely, widen, diverge, split open, gape, yawn; to open (عن so that s.th. becomes visible); to show, reveal (عن s.th.); to relax, become relaxed (features; crisis); to be dispelled, be driven away (grief, sorrow); to become gay
فرج farj pl. فروج furūj opening, aperture, gap, breach; pudendum of the female, vulva
فرج faraj freedom from grief or sorrow, release from suffering; joy; relaxation; relief, ease, repose, pleasure, comfort; happy ending
فرجة furja state of happiness (esp. after suffering); pleasure, delight; -- (pl. فرج) opening, aperture, gap, breach, hole; onlooking, watching, inspection, viewing; sight, spectacle
فراريج pl. )ة un. n. (coll.; farrūj فروج
frārīj  chick, young chicken, pullet
فرارجي (eg.) farargī seller of chicken, poulterer
مفرج mafraj pl. مفارج mafārij  relief, relaxation; denouement, happy ending
افراج ifrāj freeing, liberation; release ( عن of s.o., of s.th.), unblocking (عن e.g., of assets), decontrol (عن e.g., of rationed foodstuffs, etc.)
تفرج tafarruj inspection, viewing, regarding; watching, observation
انفراج infirāj relaxedness, relaxation
متفرج mutafarrij pl. -ūn viewer, watcher, observer, spectator, onlooker
منفرج munfarij opened wide, wide- open; relaxed; gay, merry │ منفرجة زاوية (zāwiya) obtuse angle (geom.)
فرجار firjār compass, dividers
فرجون firjaun currycomb, brush
فرح fariḥa a (faraḥ) to be glad, happy, delighted, rejoice (ب ل، at), be gay, merry, cheerful (ب ل، about, over) II to gladden, delight, cheer, exhilarate, make merry, happy, gay (ه s.o.)
فرح faraḥ joy, gladness, glee, gaiety, hilarity, mirth, exhilaration, merriment, happiness; wedding; pl. افراح afrāḥ feast of rejoicing, celebration, festival, festivity; wedding (feast) │ األفراح ردھة radhat al-a. banquet hall, ball-room
فرحة farḥa joy
فرح fariḥ merry, gay, cheerful, joyful, glad, delighted, happy
فرحان farḥān  merry, gay, cheerful, joyful, glad, delighted, happy
مفارح mafāriḥ  feasts of rejoicing, joyous events
تفريح tafrīḥ exhilaration, amusement
فارح fāriḥ merry, gay, cheerful, joyful, glad, delighted, happy
مفرح mufriḥ gladdening, cheering, exhilarating, joyous, delightful 702
فرخ II to have young ones (bird); to hatch (said of eggs); to hatch, incubate (ھ s.th.); to germinate, sprout, put out new shoots (of a tree); to spread, gain ground IV to have young ones (bird); to hatch (said of eggs); to hatch. incubate (ھ s.th.); to germinate,
 sprout, put out new shoots (of a tree) │ روعه افرخ (rau‘uhū) fear left him
فرخ fark pl. افراخ afrāk فروخ furūk, فرخ firāk, فرخان firkān young bird; shoot, spout (of a plant, of a tree) │ ورق فرخ f. waraq (eg.) sheet of paper
فرخة farka pl. فراخ firāk young female bird; hen │ رومي فرخ (rūmī) (eg.) turkey hen
فراخ firāk (pl. of فرخ) poultry, domestic fowls
فرخ tafrīk hatching, incubation │ آلة التفريخ incubator
فرد farada and faruda u (فرود furūd) to be single, be alone; to be singular, be unique;
-- farada u (فرود furūd) to withdraw, retire, segregate (عن from); -- farada i (eg.) to spread, spread out, extend, stretch (ھ s.th.); to unfold (ھ s.th.) IV to set aside, separate, segregate, isolate (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to single out. assign especially (ب or ھ ل s.th. for), devote (ب or ھ ل s.th. to s.th. else) V to be alone; to do alone, perform single-handedly (ب s.th.); to possess alone (ب s.th.); to be matchless, be unique VII = V; to stand alone, b. without parallel (في or ب with or in s.th.); to withdraw, segregate, walk away (عن from); to be isolated (عن from) X to find ( ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) singular, unique or isolated; to isolate (ھ s.th., chem.)
فرد fard pl. افراد afrād, فرادى furādā alone, single; sole, only; solitary, lone, lonely; singular, unique, matchless, unrivaled, peerless, incomparable; one, a single one, a single thing, a single person, individual; odd, uneven (number); الفرد epithet of the month of Rajab; (pl. فراد firād) one, one of a couple, one of a pair; (pl. فرود furūd, فرودة furūda) pistol; -- singular (gram.) │ فردا فردا fardan) singly, separately, one by one, one at a time, one after the other
فردة farda one part, one half, one of a pair
فردى fardī single, solitary; single- (in compounds); pertaining to a single person; one-man (in compounds); solo (adj.); singles (tennis); individual, personal; individualist; odd, uneven (numbr)
فردية fardīya individuality, individualism
فريد farīd alone, lone, lonely, solitary; singular, unique, matchless, peerless, unrivaled, incomparable; (with foll. genit.) especially endowed with │ بابه في فريد unique of its kind
فريدة farīda pl. فرائد farā’d  precious pearl, precious gem, solitaire; (eg.) quire (of paper)
فرادا furādan singly, separately, one by one, one at a time, one after the other
فرادى furādā singly, separately, one by one, one at a time, one after the other
تفريدي tafrīdī detailed, itemized
انفراد infirād solitude, loneness, loneliness; isolation, seclusion │ على االنفراد alone, apart, isolatedly, in solitude, in seclusion; singly, by o.s.; confidentially; بالسلطة االنفراد (sulṭa) autocracy
انفرادي infirādī individual; individualistic; autocratic; isolationistic, tending to isolation 703
مفرد mufrad single, solitary, lone, detached, isolated; (gram.) simple, consisting of only one word (expression); being in the singular; singular (gram.); (pl.
-āt) vocable, word; pl. words, terms, names, expressions (of a scientific field); details │ خاصة مفردات (kāṣṣa) technical terms, terminology; بمفرده by o.s., alone, apart, singly, isolatedly, in solitude, in seclusion, solitarily; بالمفردات in detail; by retail
منفرد munfarid isolated, detached, separated; lone, solitary, alone; solo (adj.; also mus.)
  □ فردة firda (<فرضة  furḍa) pl. فرد firad tax, head tax, poll tax
farādīs  فراديس pl. f., al-firdaus الفردوس
Paradise
فردوسي firdausī paradisiacal, heavenly
 فرز faraza i (farz) and IV to set apart, separate, detach, isolate (ھ s.th.); to secrete, excrete, discharge (ھ s.th.; physiol.); to sort, sift, classify (ھ s.th.); to examine (ھ s.th.), screen (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.),
 muster (ه s.o.); to select, pick out (ھ s.th.); to distinguish, discriminate, differentiate ( ھ من s.th. from)
فرز farz separation, detachment, isolation; secretion, excretion, discharge; sorting, sifting; mustering, muster, screening, examination; selection, selecting │ عسكري فرز (‘askarī) pre- induction examination (mil.)
فرازة farrāza: O آلية فرازة (‘ā1īya) seed separator, seed-screening apparatus
مفرزة mafraza pl. مفارز mafāriz  group, detachment, party, troop, band
افراز ifrāz pl. -āt secretion, excretion, exudation, discharge, expectoration (physiol.) │ افراز قسمة qismat i. partition in kind (Isl. Law)
O فارزة fāriza comma
مفرزات mufrazāt secretions, excretions, exudations (physiol.) │ الداخلية المفرزات (dākilīya) internal secretions, endocrines
افرزة = افريز pl. فريز  
alphabetically up look فيروزج and فيروز، فاروز 
 افريز pl. افاريز look up alphabetically
فرزان II tafarzana to queen, become a queen (of a pawn; in chess)
فرزان firzān pl. فرازين farāzīn   queen (in chess)
  فرس farasa i (fars) to kill, tear (ھ its prey, of a predatory animal) V to regard searchingly, eye, scrutinize (ه ھ، or في s.o., s.th.), look firmly (ه ھ، or في at s.o., at s.th.); to recognize, detect (ھ a quality, في in s.o.) VIII = I; to ravish, rape (ھا a woman)
فرس faras m. and f., pl. افراس afrās horse, mare; knight (chess) │ البحر فرس f. al-baḥr hippopotamus; الرھان فرس race horse; األعظم الفرس PegaSus (astron.)
فراسة farāsa horsemanship, equitation
فراسة firāsa perspicacity, acumen, discernment, discrimination, minute observation; keen eye (esp. for traits of character); intuitive knowledge of human nature │ الفراسة علم ‘ilm al-f. physiognomy; اليد فراسة f. al-yad chiromancy, palmistry
فريسة farīsa pl. فرائس farā’is  prey (of a wild animal)
Pharisee فرسي farīsī, فريسي
فروسة furūsa horsemanship, equitation; chivalry, knighthood,
فروسية furūsīya horsemanship, equitation; chivalry, knighthood; heroism, valor
فارس fāris pl. فرسان fursān, فوارس fawāris  horseman, rider; knight, cavalier; 704 hero; pl. cavalry │ ذلك فرسان من لست الميدان (lastu, maidān) I am unfamiliar with this field, I am not competent in this field
فارسة fārisa pl. -āt horsewoman; mounted female warrior, Amazon
مفترس muftaris rapacious, ravenous (animal) │ مفترس حيوان (ḥayawān) predatory animal, beast of prey
 الفرس al-fursān the Persians; Persia, also بالد الفرس
Persia بالد فارس also fāris, فارس
فارسي fārisī Persian (adj. and n.)
فرسي visāy Versailles
فرسخ farsak pl. فراسخ farāsik  a measure of length, parasang
فرسوفيا varōviyā Warsaw (capital of Poland)
فرش faraša u (farš, فراش firāš) to spread, spread out (ھ s.th.); -- faraša u i (farš) to pave, cover (ھ the ground, floor, path, room, etc., ب with) II to cover (ھ the floor, etc., ب with); to furnish, provide with furniture (ھ ..th.); to tile, pave (ھ s.th.) VIII to spread, spread out (ھ s.th.); to lie down, stretch out, sprawl (ھ on s.th.); to sleep (ھا with a woman) │ افترش لسانه (lisānahū) to give one’s tongue free rein
فرش farš pl. فروش furūš furnishing; furniture, household effects; mat, rug, carpet; anything spread on the ground as bedding; foundation (arch.)
فرشة farša bed; mattress
فراش farāš wheel (of a mill); (coll.; n. un. ة) moths; butterflies
فراشة farāša (n. un.) moth; butterfly; flighty, fickle person
 فراش firāš pl. فرش furuš, افرشة afriša cushion, pillow; blanket, cover, spread; mattress; bed
فراش farrāš one who spreads the carpets; servant, attendant; house servant, valet; office boy, errand boy
مفرش mifraš pl. مفارش mafāriš  tablecloth, table cover, cover (in general); bedspread, counterpane
مفرشة mifraša pl. مفارش mafāriš  saddle blanket
مفروش mafrūš covered (ب with); furnished; مفروشات mafrūšāt furniture, household effects
 فرش II to brush (ھ s.th.)
brush; furaš فرش pl. furša فرشة فرشة puff; powder فرشة البودرة │ paintbrush toothbrush asnān f. اسنان
فرشاة furšāh brush; paintbrush
فرشاية furšāya (syr.) brush
فرشح faršaḥ (فرشحة faršaḥa) to straddle, stand with one’s legs apart
faršaḥa فرشح = faršaka فرشخ
فرشينة (It. forcina) furšīna pl. -āt hairpin
فرص II to make holidays
فرصة furṣa pl. فرص furaṣ opportunity, chance, auspicious moment; holidays, vacation │ الزمن من فرصة (furṣatan, zaman) for a short time, briefly; انتھز الفرصة (intahaza) to seize the opportunity, avail o.s. or take advantage of the opportunity
فريصة farīṣa pl. فرائص farā’iṣ  flesh or muscle beneath the shoulder-blades │ فريصته or فرائصه ارتعدت (irta‘adat) violent fear or excitement seized him
مفرص mufarriṣ holiday-maker, vacationist, tourist
فرصاد firṣād mulberry; mulberry tree
فرض faraḍa i (farḍ) to decide, determine; to decree, order, ordain (ھ s.th.); to appoint, assign, apportion, allocate (ل ھ to s.o. s.th., money, and the like); to impose, 705 enjoin, make incumbent (على ھ upon s.o. s.th.), prescribe (على ھ to s.o. s.th.); to impose (
الحصار blockade, على on); to assume, presume, suppose, presuppose, postulate ( ھ s.th., ان that) │ عليه ارادته فرض (irādatahū) to force one’s will on s.o. II to notch (ھ s.th.), make incisions (ھ in s.th.) VIII to impose, enjoin, make incumbent ( على ھ upon s.o. s.th.), prescribe (على ھ to
s.o. s.th.); to decree, order (ھ s.th.); to assume, suppose (ھ s.th., ان that)
فرض farḍ pl. فروض furūḍ notch, incision; duty, precept, injunction, order, decree, ordinance, command; religious duty (Isl. Law); statutory portion, lawful shore (Isl. Law); assumption, supposition, presupposition, premise, postulate, hypothesis │ التحية فروض f. at-taḥīya prescribed forms of salutations; عين فرض
f. ‘ain individual duty (Isl. Law); كفاية فرض collective duty (Isl. Law); فرض على on the premise of …; ان فرض على on the assumption that, with the understanding that ..., supposing that ...
فرضي farḍī hypothetic(al), suppositional, conjectural, assumed without proof
فرضية farḍīya hypothesis
فرضة furḍa pl. فرض furaḍ notch, incision; opening, gap, crevice, crack; seaport, river harbor, small port town
فريضة farīḍa pl. فرائض farā’ḍ  religious duty (Isl. Law); divine precept, ordinance of God (Isl. Law); obligatory prayer (Isl. Law); pl. distributive shares in estate (Isl. Law) │ الجمعة فريضة f. al-jum‘a the obligatory divine service on Friday (Isl.
Law); الفرائض ذو dawū l-f. the “Koranic heirs”, i.e., those entitled to a statutory portion in estate according to sura lV, 12ff. (Isl. Law); الفرائض علم ‘ilm al-f. law of descent and distribution
افتراض iftirāḍ assumption, supposition, presupposition, premise, postulate, hypothesis
افتراضي iftirāḍī hypothetic(al) فارض fāriḍ old, advanced in years مفروض mafrūḍ supposed, assumed,
premised; pl. مفروضات duties, obligations
فرط farata u to precede (ه s.o.); to escape inadvertently, slip (من s.o.’s tongue; of
 words); to escape (من s.o.), get lost (من on s.o.); to happen (inadvertently) (من to s.o., faux pas, etc.); to neglect (في s.th.), be lax, be remiss (في with regard to); to strip off ( ھ fruits) │ الشيء منه فرط (šai’u) he missed the thing, lost it II to leave, abandon, forsake, give up (ه s.o., في or ,. s.th.), renounce, waive (في or ھ s.th.); to separate (ه or عن from), part (ه or عن with); to neglect (في s.th.), be lax, be remiss (في with regard to); to exceed the proper bounds, go too far, be excessive (في in), exaggerate, overdo (في s.th.); to waste, squander (في s.th.) IV to exceed the proper bounds, go too far, be excessive (في in), exaggerate, overdo, abuse (في s.th.) VII to be stripped off, be loosened, become detached (من from); to be dissolved, dissolve, break up │ عقدھم انفرط (‘aqduhum) they broke up, they parted company, they dissolved
فرط farṭ excess, immoderation, exaggeration; (with foll. abstract noun) hyper- (in compounds)
فرط faraṭ (eg.) interest (on money, capital, etc.)
فراطة furāṭa small change, coins تفريط tafrīṭ negligence, neglect افراط afrāṭ excess, immoderation,
exaggeration
فارط fāriṭ elapsed, bygone, put, last, e.g., الفارط األحد يوم (yaum al-aḥad) last Sunday
مفرط mufarril prodigal, wasteful, squandering; wastrel, spendthrift, prodigal, squanderer
مفرط mufriṭ exaggerated, excessive 706
فرطح farṭaḥa to make broad, broaden, flatten (
ھ s.th.)
مفرطح mufarṭaḥ broad; flattened, flat, oblate; fat and flabby, bloated
فرع fara‘a a (far‘, فرع furū‘) to surpass, outstrip (ه s.o.); to excel (ه s.o.) II to put forth branches, to branch; to derive, deduce (ھ من s.h. from) V to branch out, ramify, become ramified, spread in all directions; to divide, fork, bifurcate (road, pipeline); to branch off VIII to de1lower
فرع far‘ pl. فروع furū‘, افرع afru‘ twig, branch. bough, limb, (also coll.) branches, twigs; derivative; section, subdivision; branch office, subsidiary establishment, branch; branch line, feeder line; branch wire, feed wire (el.) │ الفروع or الفروع علم ‘ilm al-f. the doctrine of the branches, i.e., applied fiqh, applied ethics (consisting in the systematic elaboration of canonical law in Islam); وفرعا شرعا šar‘an wa-far‘an with full right, with good cause, justly
فرعي fa‘ī branch, subsidiary, tributary, sub-, side (in compounds); subdivisional; secondary
افرع afra‘ , f. فرعاء far‘ā’ tall, slender
تفرع tafarru‘ many-sidedness, versatility; (pl. -āt) ramification; pl. secondary things, concomitant circumstances, minor factors
فارع fāri‘ tall, lofty, towering; high- grown, slender, slim; beautiful, handsome, pretty │ الطول فارع f. aṭ-ṯūl tall, high- grown; القامة فارع tall and slender
مفرع mufarra‘ ramified, branching
متفرعات mutafarri‘āt secondary things, concomitant circumstances, minor factors
فرعون fir‘aun pl. فراعنة farā‘ina Pharaoh
فرغ faraga u and fariga a (فروغ furūg, فراغ farāg) to be empty, be void; to be vacant; to be exhausted, be used up; to be rid (من of s.o.), be done, be finished (من with); to finish, terminate, conclude, close, wind up, finish off, settle, complete, bring to an end (من s.th.); to devote o.s. apply o.s. attend, tend (الى or ل to s.o. to s.th.), occupy o.s. (الى or ل with) │ نفسه الى فرغ to collect one’s thoughts II to empty, void, vacate, evacuate, discharge (ھ s.th.); to unload (ھ a cargo); to pour out (ھ s.th.) IV to empty, void, vacate, evacuate (ھ s.th.); to pour out (ھ على s.th. over. في into); to unload (ھ s.th., e.g., from a ship)
│ قالب في افرغه (qālab) to mold s.th. (fig.); (مجھوده or) جھده افرغ (jahdahū) to exert o.s. to the utmost, make every effort (في in), do one’s best V to be free from work. be unoccupied, be idle, have leisure; to be free, disengage o.s. (الى or ل for some work), occupy o.s. exclusively (الى or ل with), devote o.s., apply o.s., attend (الى or
 ل to) X to empty (ھ a bowl, and the like); to vomit │ مجھوده استفرغ to exert o.s. to the utmost. make every effort (في in), apply every ounce of strength (في to), do one’s best
فرغ farg empty, void; vacant
فراغ farāg void, vacuity, vacancy, vacuum, empty space; gap; space (ل for s.o., for s.th.); cession (of things which are not transferable as a property, but transferable as a possession; (Isl. Law); leisure, sparetime
فراغي farāgī vacuum (adj.)
فروغ furūg emptiness, voidness, vacuity; vacancy, unocoupiedness; termination, expiration, exhaustion │ فروغ الصبر f. aṣ-ṣabr impatience
افرغ afrag  emptier
تفريغ tafrīg emptying, vacating, evacuation; discharge; unloading (of a cargo) 707
افراغ ifrāg emptying, vacating, evacuation; pouring out
استفراغ istifrāg emptying, voiding, vacating, evacuation; vomiting
فارغ fārig pl. فراغ furrāg empty, void; vacant; unoccupied, not busy, idle, leisurely; inane, vacuous, idle, useless; -- tare (com.) │ بالفارغ in the void (of the target) = in the bull’s-eye; الصبر بفارغ bi-f. iṣ-ṣabr impatiently
منه مفروغ mafrūg minh finished, settled (question, problem, and the like); exhausted (topic, and the like)
مفرغ mufarrig emptying; creating a vacuum │ O مفرغة آلة vacuum pump
مفرغ mufarrag emptied, vacated, exhausted of air, vacuum (adj.); hollow
مفرغ mufrag cast (in a mold) │ حلقة مفرغة (ḥalqa) seamless ring; vicious circle, circulus vitiosus
 فرفر farfara to shake itself (of animals, esp. of a bird)
فرفر farfar small bird
فرفور furfūr small bird
porcelain fine فغفوري = farfūrī فرفوري  
  فرفيرfirfīr purple, purpure
فرفش farfaša: نفسه فرفش (eg.) to recover, pick up, revive
فرفشة farfaša (eg.) ease, comfort, convenience, leisure
فرفير firfīr purple, purpure
فرق faraqa u (farq, فرقان furqān to separate, part, divide, sever, sunder (ھ s.th.); to make a distinction (بين between), distinguish, differentiate, discriminate (بين between); فرق (farq) to part (ھ the hair); fariqa a (faraq) to be terrified, be dismayed; to be afraid (من of) II to separate, part, divide, sever, sunder (ھ s.th.); to strew about, scatter, disperse (ھ s.th.); to make a distinction (بين between), distinguish, differentiate (بين between; ه عن
s.o. from); to distribute (في or ھ على s.th. to, among); to frighten, scare, daunt, terrify, horrify (ه s.o.) │ تسد فرق farriq tasud divide and rule! divide et impera! III to separate o.s. disengage o.s., withdraw, depart (ه ھ، from s.o., from s.th.), part (,ھ ه with s.o., with s.th.), leave, quit (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) V to be or become separated, split, disunited, divided, scattered, dispersed, separate, part, divide, scatter, disperse, dissolve, break up VII to be or become separated, disunited, divided, separate o.s., disengage o.s. (عن from), part (عن with) VIII = V │ قددا طرائق افترق (ṭarā’iqa qidadan) to split into many parts or groups, become divided
فرق farq separation, severance, sunderance, division, partition; differentiation, distinction, discrimination; parting (of the hair); -- (pl. فروق furūq) difference, dissimilarity, distinction; small change, coins; pl. cases similar with regard to facts, yet different as to their legal implications (Isl. Law)
فرق firq part, portion, division, section, unit; band, company, party, detachment, troop, group; herd, flock
فرق faraq fear, fright, terror
فرق fariq fearful, timid, timorous, cowardly, craven
فرقة firqa pl. فرق firaq part, portion, division, section, unit; band, company,
 party, detachment, troop, group; class; grade, class (in school); pupils or students of a course; troupe, ensemble; team, crew; division (mil.); sect │ الألجنبية الفرقة (ajnabīya) the Foreign Legion; الفرقة  الخامسة the fifth column; مصفحة فرقة (muṣaffaḥa) armored division; المطافئ فرقة ٨٠٧ (or األطفاء) f. al-maṭāfi  (or al-iṭfā’) fire department, fire brigade; اإلعدام فرقة f. al-i‘dām firing squad; استعراضية فرقة (isti‘rāḍīya) show troupe, revue troupe; موسيقية فرقة (mūsīqīya) orchestra; فرقة موسيقى f. mūsīqā (military) band
فرقة furqa separatedness, separation, disunion
فريق farīq pl. فروق furūq, افرقة afriqa, افرقاء afriqā  band, company, troop, detachment, unit; party; faction; team (sports); - a military and naval rank, approx.: lieutenant general (Eg.), vice admiral (Eg.) │ اول فريق (awwal) lieutenant general (Ir.); ثان فريق (tānin) major general (Ir.)
فروق farūq very fearful, timid, timorous, cowardly, craven;
--Constantinople
فاروق fārūq very timorous; الفاروق he who distinguishes truth from falsehood (epithet of the 2nd Caliph, Omar)
فاروقية fārūqīya “Faruk cap”, winter field cap of the Egyptian Air Force (1939)
فرقان furqān proof, evidence; الفرقان the Koran
مفرق mafraq, mafriq pl. مفارق mafāriq  crossing, intersection, bifurcation, forking, fork, junction, interjunction; road fork, highway intersection, crossroads, also الطرق مفرق m. aṭ-ṭuruq; المفرق al-mafraq or المفرق قلعة qal‘at al-m. Mafrak (city in N Jordan) │ الشعر مفرق mafriq aš-ša‘r parting (of the hair)
تفريق tatrīq separation, severance, sunderance, partition, division; dispersion, dispersal, scattering; differentiation, distinction, discrimination; distribution; pl. تفاريق tafārīq  single, separate parts, detached sections │ بالتفريق in detail; in portions; by retail (com.)
تفرقة tafriqa separation, severance, sunderance, partition, division; dispersion, dispersal, scattering; differentiation, distinction, discrimination; distribution │ بالتفرقة in detail; in portions; by retail (com.)
مفارقة mufāraqa separation, parting, farewell, leave-taking, departure; difference, dissimilarity, distinction
فراق firāq separation, parting, farewell, leave-taking, departure; difference, dissimilarity, distinction
تفرق tafarruq separation, disunion, division; dispersing, dispersal, scattering; deployment (in the field; mil.)
افتراق iftirāq separation, disunion, division
فارق fāriq distinguishing, differential, distinctive, discriminative, separative; (pl. فوارق fawāriq ) a separating or distinctive factor; distinctive characteristic, criterion; difference, distinction, dissimilarity, disparity │ الفارق بعد مع (bu‘d l-f.) in spite of the great difference
مفرق mufarriq distributor, retailer; mailman, postman
تاجر المفرق │ (adj.) retail mufarraq مفرق
retail merchant, retailer; بالمفرق by retail
متفرق mutafarriq dispersed, scattered; sporadic; متفرقات miscellany, sundries (com.), miscellaneous items
مفترق muftaraq crossing, intersection, bifurcation, forking, fork, junction, interjunction; road fork, highway intersection, crossroads, also الطرق مفترق
m. aṭ-ṭuruq
alphabetically up look فواريق pl. فاوريقة 
 افريقيا look up alphabetically
alphabetically up look افارقة pl. افريقي 
فرقد farqad calf; الفرقدان two bright stars of Ursa Minor (β and γ) 709
فرقع farqa‘a (فرقعة farqa‘a) to pop, crack, burst, explode II tafarqa‘a = I
فرقعة farqa‘a crack, pop, report (of a firearm); explosion, blast
 مفرقع mufarqi‘ explosive, blasting (adj.); pl. مفرقعات explosives; firecrackers, fireworks
فرقلة farqilla (eg.) pl. -āt whip with a leather thong, used in driving animals
فرك faraka u (fark) to rob (ھ s.th.) II = I V to be robbed VII = V
فريك farīk rubbed; cooked green wheat O مفراك mifrāk twirling stick
 فراك look up alphabetically
فركش farkaša (eg.) to disarrange, dishevel, tangle (ھ s.th.), tousle, muss, tear (hair)
 فرم farama i (farm) to out into small pieces (ھ meat, tobacco), mince, chop, hash (ھ meat) II = I
مفرمة miframa meat grinder; mincer, mincing machine
مفرمم mafrūm: مفروم دخان (dukān) finely cut tobacco; مفروم لحم (laḥm) chopped meat, hashed meat
 فرم (It. forma) furma pl. فرم furam mold
فرمان faramān pl. -āt, فرامين farāmīn  firman; decree, edict; (letter of) safe-conduct, laisser-passer (formerly, in the Ottoman Empire)
فرمبواز (Fr. framboise) frambuwāz raspberry
فرمسون (eg.) firmasōn (from Fr. franc-maçon)
Freemason
فرملة farmala pl. فرامت farāmil  brake (of a wheel, etc.)
فرملجي (eg.) farmalgī pl. -īya brakeman
فرموزا farmōza, formōza Formosa
فرن furn pl. افران afran oven, baking oven
فران farrān baker
فرنج II tafarnaja to become Europeanized, adopt European manners, imitate the Europeans
بالد │ Europeans the al-ifranj اإلفرنج Europe اإلفرنج
syphilis اإلفرنجي European; ifranjī افرنجي
فرنجة firanja  Land of the Franks, Europe
تفرنج tafarnuj Europeanization, imitation of the Europeans
متفرنج mutafarnij Europeanized
 فرند firind a sword of exquisite workmanship
 فرندة faranda, varanda pl. -āt veranda, porch
فرنس farnasa (فرنسة farnasa) to make French, Frenchify, imbue with French culture (ھ s.th.) II tafarnasa to become a Frenchman; to imitate the French
France )فرنسة (also faransā فرنسا
فرنسي faransī French; (pl. -ūn)
Frenchman
French )فرنسوي (also faransāwī فرنساوي
الفرنسيس al-faransīs the French
الفرنسيسكان al-faransiskān the Franciscans فرنك (Fr. franc) firank and فرنكة pl. -āt franc فره farih lively, agile, nimble
فراھة farāha liveliness, agility, nimbleness, swiftness (of an animal); sturdiness
فاره fārih lively, agile, nimble, swift (animal); comely, pretty; sturdy; big
فرو farw (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. فراء firā’ furriery, fur(s), skin(s), pelt(s), peltry
فروة farwa (n. un.) fur, pelt; akin, hide │ فروة الرأس scalp; فروة ابو abū f. (eg.) chestnut 710 فرى farā i (fary) to split lengthwise, cut lengthwise (ھ s.th.); (eg.) to mince, chop (ھ s.th.); to invent lyingly, fabricate, trump up (ھ على s.th. against) │ كذبا فرى (kidban) to fabricate, or invent, a lie (على against) II to split lengthwise, cut lengthwise (ھ s.th.) IV = II; VIII to invent lyingly, fabricate, trump up (ه على s.th. against); to slander, libel, calumniate (على s.o.)
فرية firya pl. فرى firan lie, falsehood, falsity; slander, calumny
فرى farīy: فريا شيئا (جاء or) اتى to do s.th. unheard-of, do an unprecedented thing
مفراة mifrāh (eg.) (= مفرمة) meat grinder; mincer, mincing machine
افتراء iftirā’ lie, falsehood, falsity; slander, calumny
مفتر muftarin slanderer, calumniator
 مفتريات muftarayāt lies, falsities; calumnies
فريز farīz pl. افرزة afriza = افريز ifrīz (look up alphabetically)
فز fazza i (fazz) to jump up, start, bolt; to be or become frightened, terrified, dismayed, startled; to frighten, alarm, startle (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), scare away (ه ھ، عن s.o., s.th. from) IV to frighten, alarm, startle (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), scare away (ه ھ، عن s.o., s.th. from) V to become restless, restive, uneasy X to fill with unrest or excitement, rouse, agitate, excite, stir up, instigate, incite, egg on, inflame, whip up (ه s.o.), provoke (ھ an incident); to startle (ه عن s.o. out of); to stir up, arouse (ه من
s.o. from)
فزة fazza start, jump, bolt, dart
استفزاز istifzāz pl. -āt instigation, agitation, incitement, provocation
استفزازي istifzāzī agitative, instigative, inflammatory, rabble-rousing, provocative, incendiary
فزر lazara u (fazr) to tear, rent, burst (ھ s.th.) V to be torn, be rent, split open, burst VII
= V
فزارة fazāra female leopard
فزورة fazūra pl. فوازر fawāzir  (eg.) riddle, puzzle
فزع fazi‘a a (faza‘) and faza‘a a (faz‘, fiz‘) to be afraid, be scared (من of), be alarmed, frightened, terrified (ل or من by); -- fazi‘a a to take refuge, flee (الى to), seek asylum (الى with) II to strike (ه s.o.) with fear; to frighten, scare, alarm, terrify, dismay, startle (ه s.o.) IV to frighten, startle, terrify, scare (ه s.o.) V to be terrified, startled, dismayed; to be frightened │ تفزع نومه من (naumihī) to be roused from one’s sleep
فزع faza‘ pl. افزاع afzā‘ fear, fright, terror, alarm, dismay, anxiety, consternation, panic
فزع fazi‘ frightened, terrified, scared, alarmed, startled, dismayed, fearful, timorous
فزعان faz‘ān frightened. terrified, scared, alarmed, startled, dismayed, fearful, timorous
فزاعة fazzā‘a one who inspires fear; scarecrow
مفزع mafza‘ place of refuge, retreat, sanctuary
مفزعة mafza‘a place of refuge, retreat, sanctuary; scarecrow
مفزع mufzi‘ terrible, dreadful, alarming
مفزع mufzi‘ frightened, terrified, alarmed, startled
فستان fustān pl. فساتين fasātīn  (woman’s) dress, gown, frock
فستق fustuq, fustaq pistachio (bot.)
فسح fasuḥa u (فسحة fusḥa, فساحة fasāḥa) to be or become wide, spacious, roomy; 711 – fasaḥa a (fasḥ) to make room, clear a space (في ھ، in, ل for) II to make wide, make spacious, widen, broaden, extend, expand (ھ s.th.); to make room, clea a space (ل for) │ له مجاال فسح (majālan) to make room for s.o., or s.th., give s.o. or s.th. free play or free scope; to open up an opportunity for s.o.; الطريق له فسح to open or pave the way for s.o. or s.th. IV to make room, clear a space (ل for); to clear. open up (ھ s.th., ل for) V to be or become wide, spacious, roomy; to walk, take a walk VII to be or become wide, spacious, roomy; to extend, expand, dilate; to be free, be ample (time) │ األوقات لي انفسحت I had plenty of time
فسحة fusḥa wideness, ampleness, spaciousness, roominess; extensive possibilities, ample opportunities, wide scope for action; (time) margin, enough time (ل for); -- (pl. فسح fusaḥ, -āt) free, open, or empty, space; holidays, vaoation; walk, promenade, stroll, ride, drive, outing, excursion │ فسحة الوقت في زال ما (waqt) there is still time
فسحة fusḥa pl. -āt (eg.) anteroom, vestibule, hallway, entrance hall; (eg., also syr.) open space between houses; courtyard
فسيح fasīḥ) pl. فساح fisāḥ wide, ample, spacious, roomy, broad
 انفساح infisāḥ wideness, ampleness; extension, expansion, dilation
منفسح munfasaḥ) wideness, ampleness; plane, surface
فسخ fasaka a (fask) to dislocate, disjoint, luxate, put out of joint (ھ a limb); to sever, sunder, tear (ھ s.th.); (jur.) to cancel, abolish, rescind, revoke, abrogate, annul, nullify, invalidate, dissolve, void, vacate (ھ s.th.); -- fasika a (fasak) to lose color; to fade (color) II to tear to pieces, tear apart, lacerate, mangle (ھ s.th.); (eg.) to salt (ھ fish) V to break up into fragments, fall apart, disintegrate VII (jur.) to be canceled, abolished, rescinded, revoked, abrogated, annulled, nullified, invalidated, dissolved, voided, vacated
فسخ fask (jur.) cancellation, abolishment, abolition, rescission, revocation, abrogation, annulment, nullification, invalidation, dissolving, voiding, vacating
فسخي faskī abolitionary, revocatory, abrogative, nullifying
فسخة faska (wood) splinter, chip, sliver
فسيخ fasīk (eg.) small salted fish
متفسخ mutafassik degenerate(d)
فسد fasada u i (فساد fasād, فسود fusūd) to be or become bad, rotten, decayed, putrid, be spoiled; to be or become vicious, wicked, vile, corrupt, depraved, be marred, impaired, corrupted, perverted, vitiated; to be empty, vain, idle, unsound, false, wrong II to spoil, deprave, ruin, corrupt, demoralize (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to degrade, abase, sully, tarnish, defile (ه ,ھ s.o., s.th.) IV to spoil (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.; ھ s.th. على of s.o., e.g., s.o.’s plans, etc.), deprave, corrupt, pervert, demoralize (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to mar, distort, devaluate, depreciate, denigrate, degrade (ھ s.th., على for s.o.); to weaken, sap. undermine, upset, ruin, destroy, foil, thwart, frustrate ( ھ s.th.); to alienate, estrange (ه على s.o. from another; على ھ s.o. from s.th.), entice away (على s.o., ھ from s.th.); to sow, or stir up, dissension (بين among); to act evilly, wickedly; to cause mischief │ افسد امره عليه (amrahū) to play s.o. a dirty trick VII = I
فساد fasād rottenness, spoiledness, corruption, decay, decomposition, putrefaction, putridity; depravity, wickedness, viciousness, iniquity. immorality; weakness; 712 pervertedness, wrongness ; incorrectness, imperfection (of a legal transaction; Isl. Law)
مفسدة mafsada pl. مفاسد mafāsid  cause  of corruption or evil; scandalous deed, heinous act; pl. مفاسد dirty tricks, malicious acts, chicaneries │ والمفسدة المصلحة في (maṣlaḥa) in good and bad times, for better or for worse
افساد ifsād thwarting, undermining, sabotaging
فاسد fāsid pl. فسدي fasadī bad, foul, rotten, spoiled, decayed, decomposed, putrid; depraved, corrupt, vicious, wicked, immoral; empty, vain, idle, unsound, false, wrong; imperfect (legal transaction; Isl. Law) │ فاسد دور (daur) vicious circle, circulus vitiosus
فسر II to explain, expound, explicate, elucidate, interpret (ھ s.th.), comment (ھ on) V to be explained, interpreted, etc. (see II); to have an explanation (ب in), be explainable (ب with, by) X to ask (ه s.o.) for an explanation (عن of), inquire (ه عن of
s.o. about), ask (ه عن s.o. about); to seek an explanation (عن for)
تفسير tafsīr pl. تفاسير tafāsīr  explanation, exposition, elucidation, explication, interpretation; commentary (esp. one on the Koran)
تفسيري tafsīrī explanatory, explicatory, illustrative
تفسرة tafsira urine specimen (of a patient, for diagnosis)
استفسار istifsār pl. -āt inquiry, question (
عن about)
مفسر mufassir commentator
فسطاط fusṭāṭ pl. فساطيط fasāṭīṭ  (large) tent made of haircloth; tent, pavilion, canopy; الفسطاط al-fusṭāṭ ancient Islamic city south of present-day Cairo
فستان see fasāṭīn  فساطين pl. fusṭān فسطان phosphate fusfāt فسفات
فسفر fasfara and II tafasfara to phosphoresce
 فسفر fusfur phosphorus
فسفس fasfara (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. فسافس fasāfis 
bedbug
فسفوسة fasfūsa pl. فسافيس fasāfīs  pustule, pimple
فسيفساء fusaifisā’ mosaic, mosaic work
فسق fasaqa u i (fisq, فسوق fusūq) and fasuqa u to stray from the right course; to stray, deviate (عن from); to act unlawfully, sinfully, immorally, lead a dissolute life; to fornicate (ب with) II (Isl. Law) to declare (ه s.o.) to b. a fāsiq (q.v.)
فسق fisq sinfulness, viciousness, moral depravity, dissolute life │ الفسق دور dūr al-
f. brothels
فسوق fusūq outrage, iniquity
مفسقة malaaqa pl. مفاسق mafāsiq  brothel
فاسق fāsiq pl. فساق fussāq, فسقة fasaqa godless, sinful, dissolute, wanton, licentious, profligate, vicious, iniquitous, nefarious; trespasser, offender, sinner; fornicator, adulterer; a person not meeting the legal requirements of righteousness (Isl. Law)
  فسقية fasqīya, fisqīya pl. -āt, فساقي fasāqīy
fountain; well
 فسل fasl pl. فسول fusūil low, lowly, ignoble; despicable; false, deceitful
فسل lusUIa lowliness; w.akness
fasā’il  فسائل fasīl, فسيل pl. fasīla فسيلة
palm seedling, palm shoot
فصوليا = fasūlīya فسولية   physiology faslaja فسلجة
فسلجي faslajī physiologic(al) 713
(فسا (فسو fasā u (fasw, فساء fusā’) to break wind noiselessly
فاسياء fāsiyā’  dung beetle
فصوليا = fasūliya فسولية
فسيولوجيا fisiyōlōjiyā physiology
فسيولوجي fisiyōlōjī physiologic(al); physiologist
فش fašša u (fašš) to cause (ھ a swelling, and the like) to subside; to go down, subside (swelling) │ في (غله) خلقه فش (kulqahū,
gillahū) (eg.) to vent one’s anger on … VII to go down, subside (swelling, and the like)
فشة fišša pl. فشش fišaš (eg., syr.) lung, lights (of animals)
فاشي and فاشية look up alphabetically
فشخ fašaka a (fašk) to straddle; to stride, take large steps
فشخ fašk pl. -āt stride, large step
فشر fašara u to brag, boast, swagger
فشر fašr bragging, swagger, vain
فشار fušār bragging, swagger, vain boasting
فشار fišār (eg.) popcorn
فشار faššār braggart, swaggerer, vain boaster
فشفاش fašfāš (eg.) lung, lights (of animals)
فشك fašak (coll.; n. un. ة) cartridges │ خلبي فشك (kullabī) blank cartridges (Syr.); دخاني فشك (dukānī) smoke cartridges (Syr.)
فشل fašila a (fašal) to lose courage, be or become cowardly or faint-hearted, lose heart, despair; to be disappointed; to fail, he unsuccessful (في in); to miscarry, go wrong, fail n and IV to thwart, foil, frustrate (ھ s.th.) V to fail, be unsuccessful
فشل fašal disappointment, failure, flop, fiasco
فشل fašl, fašil weak, faint-hearted, cowardly, craven
فاشل fāšil failing, unsuccessful, futile, doomed to failure; no good, worthless
(فشا (فشو fašā u (فشو fašw, fušuw, فشي fušīy) to spread, spread about, diffuse, gain ground, make the rounds, circulate; to be revealed, he disclosed, he divulged IV to spread, disseminate, put in circulation (ھ s.th.); to reveal, disclose, divulge (ھ or ب s.th.) V to spread, spread about, gain ground, rage (e.g., a disease)
تفش tafaššin spreading, spread, outbreak
فص II (eg.) to remove the outer shell (ھ of s.th.)
 فص faṣṣ pl. فصوص fuṣūṣ stone of a ring; clove (of garlic); segment (of an orange); lobe (anat., bot.); joint; essence │ ملح فص
f. milḥ (eg.) lump of salt; وفصه بنصه (naṣṣihī) in the very words, ipsissimis verbis, literally, precisely
  فصح faṣuḥa u (فصاحة faṣāḥa) to be eloquent II to bring (ھ the language) into literary form, make (ھ the language) correct Arabic, purify (ھ the language) IV to express o.s. in flawless literary Arabic; to speak clearly, distinctly, intelligibly; to give expression (عن to), express, state clearly, declare outright, make plain (عن s.th.), speak openly, frankly (عن about); to orient, inform (ل عن s.o. about); to become clear, plain, distinct V to affect eloquence, affect mastery of the language VI = V
فصيح faṣīḥ pl. فصحاء fuṣaḥā’ , فصاح fiṣāḥ, فصح fuṣuḥ pure, good Arabic (language), literary; skillful in using the correct literary language; clear, plain, distinct, 716 intelligible (language, speech); fluent, eloquent
فصاحة faṣāḥa purity of the language; fluency, eloquence
افصح afṣaḥ , f. فصحى fuṣḥā of purer language; more eloquent │(اللغة) العربية الفصحى (‘arabīya, luga) classical Arabic; الفصحى do.
افصاح ifṣāḥ flawless literary Arabic style; frank statement, open word (عن about), open declaration (عن of)
مفصح mufṣiḥ clear, plain, distinct, intelligible; cloudless, sunny, bright (day)
 فصح IV to celebrate Easter (Chr.); to celebrate Passover (Jud.)
فصح fiṣḥ, faṣḥ pl. فصوح fuṣūḥ Easter (Chr.); Pesach, Passover (Jud.)
فصد faṣada i (faṣd, فصاد faṣād) to open a vein; to bleed (ه s.o.), perform a venesection (ه on) V to drip (e.g., the face, عرقا ‘araqan with perspiration) VII to be bled, undergo a venesection; to bleed (nose)
فصد faṣd opening of a vein, bloodletting, venesection, phlebotomy
فصاد fiṣād opening of a vein, bloodletting, venesection, phlebotomy
فصادة fiṣāda pl. فصائد faṣā’id  bloodletting, venesection, phlebotomy │ فصادة ابو abū f. (eg.) wagtail (zool.)
مفصد mifṣad, pl. مفاصد mafāṣid  lancet
فصفات fuṣfāt phosphate
فصفور fuṣfūr phosphorus
فصفوري fuṣfūrī phosphoric, phosphorous │ فصفوري ضياء phosphorescence
فصل faṣala i (faṣl) to separate, part, divide, disjoin, divorce, cut off, detach, set apart, segregate (ه ھ، عن s.o. s.th. from); to separate (بين two things or persons); to isolate (ھ s.th.); to cut, sever, sunder, interrupt (ھ s.th.); to discharge, dismiss, fire, sack, expel (من or ه عن s.o. from an office), relieve, divest (من or ه عن s.o. of an office), cashier (ه s.o.); to decide (ھ a controversy, and the like), make a decision. render judgment (في in, about, with respect to); to fix the price (ھ for s.th.); -- (فصال fiṣāl) to wean (الرضاع عن ه the infant from sucking); -- faṣala u (فصول fuṣūl) to go away, depart, move away (عن or من from), leave (عن or من a place), pull out (عن or من of a place) II to divide into particular sections, arrange in sections, group, classify, categorize (ھ s.th.); to present in logical order, set forth in detail, detail, particularize (ھ s.th.); to make (ھ s.th.) clear, plain, distinct; to make to measure, cut out (ھ a garment) III to separate o.s., dissociate o.s., be separated ( ه from s.o.), part company (ه with); to haggle, bargain (ه على with s.o. for) VII to separate o.s., disengage o.s., dissociate
o.s. segregate, secede (عن from); to be separated, disjoined, detached, removed, set aside, cut off (عن from), be interrupted; to be discharged, dismissed, fired, sacked, cashiered; to retire, resign (من or عن from an office), be relieved, be divested (من or عن of an office); to quit, leave (من or عن a political party, and the like)
فصل faṣl parting, disjunction, detachment, severance, sunderance, cutting off; separation; division, partition; discharge, dismissal (من or عن from an office); decision, (rendering of) judgment;
-- (pl. فصول fuṣūl) section, part; chapter; act (of a play); movement (of a symphony,
 etc.); article (in a newspaper); class, grade (school); season │ الخطاب فصل (in letters:) conclusion of the formal greetings by the words ٥١٧ بعد اما ammā ba‘du; conclusion, termination; decision; unmistakable judgment; الخطاب فصل وبينك بيني we’re through with one another once and for all; التمثيل فصل (theater) season; الفصل القول (qaul) the last word, the final decision; يوم الفصل yaum al-f. Day of Judgment, Doomsday
فصلة منقوطة O │ comma faṣla فصلة O
semicolon
فصلة fiṣla offprint, reprint
fuṣlān فصالن fiṣāl, فصال pl. faṣīl فصيل
young (weaned) camel
فصيلة faṣīla pl. فصائل faṣā’il genus, species, family (bot., and the like); detachment, squad; group, cell (pol.); platoon, squadron (of heavy arms; mil.) │ دم فصيلة f. dam blood group; اإلعدام فصيلة f. al-i‘dām firing squad, execution squad; االستكشاف فصيلة reconnaissance squad, patrol
فيصل faiṣal decisive criterion; arbitrator, arbiter
فيصل faiṣalīya “Faisal cap”, Iraqi field cap (formerly, Ir.)
مفصل mafṣil pl. مفاصل mafāṣil  joint, articulation
مفصلي mafṣilī articular
تفصيل tafṣīl detailed statement, elaborate or minute exposition, particularization, detailing; elaborateness, minuteness, completeness of detail; cutting out, cut (of a garment); (pl. -āt, تفاصيل tafāṣīl ) detail, particular │ تفصيال tafṣīlan and بالتفصيل in detail, elaborately, minutely, circumstantially; تفصيل من ... (with foll. genit.) made to measure by ...; tailored by ...; التفصيل ثياب tailor-made clothes; التفصيل محبوك well-fitting (garment)
تفصيلي tafṣīlī detailed, minute, particular, elaborate; analytic(al); تفصيليا tafṣīlīyan separately, singly, one at a time
survey land المساحة التفصيلية │
انفصال infiṣāl separation; disengagement, dissociation, withdrawal;
secession; interruption │ O االنفصال حرب ḥarb al-inf. the American Civil War; انصار االنفصال separatists
انفصالي infiṣālī separatistic; (pl. -ūn) separatist
انفصالية infiṣālīya aeparatismفاصل faṣil separatory, separating, parting, dividing; isolating, insulating; decisive, crucial; conclusive; separation, partition, division, interruption │ فاصل بال without interruption, uninterrupted, unbroken; الحرارة فاصل f. al-ḥarāra heat-insulating (phys.); فاصلة مباراة (mubārāh) finals, final match (sports); فاصل خط (kaṭṭ) demarcation line
فاصلة fāṣila pl. فواصل fawāṣil  partition, division; interstice, interspace, interval; O comma; O dash (punctuation mark); end, rhyme of a Koranic verse
مفصل mufaṣṣal set forth or described minutely, elaborately or in great detail, detailed, minute, elaborate, circumstantial; tailor-made, custom-made; مفصال mufaṣṣalan in detail, minutely, elaborately, circumstantially
مفصلة mufaṣṣala pl. -āt hinge
منفصل munfaṣl separate, detached
فصم fṣama i (faṣm) to cause (ھ s.th.) to crack, crack (ھ s.th.); to split, cleave (ھ s.th.); pass. fuṣima to be destroyed (house) VII to have a crack, be cracked; to be split, be cleft
فصم faṣm pl. فصومات fuṣūmāt recess, niche, chamfer (in walls; arch.)
انفصام infiṣām split; O schizophrenia
فصوليا faṣūliyā (or فصولية) the common European bean (Phascolus vulgaris L.; bot.) 716
فصى V to free o.s., rid o.s. (من of), shake off (من s.th.)
فض faḍḍa (1  pers. perf. faḍaḍtu) u (faḍḍ) to break (open), pry open, force open, undo (ھ s.th., e.g., a seal); to break, snap (ھ s.th.); to scatter, disperse, break up, rout (ھ s.th.); to perforate, pierce (ھ a pearl); to conclude, close (ھ a session, and the like); to dissolve (ھ parliament); to settle (ھ a conflict, and the like); to shed (
 ھ tears) │ بكارتھا فض (bakāratahā) to deflower a girl; فوك فض ال lā fuḍḍ fūka how well you have spoken! II to plate or coat with silver, to silver (ھ s.th.) VII to he opened, be broken, be undone (e.g., a seal); to be scattered, be dispersed, be routed; to scatter, disperse, disband, break up, dissolve; to be concluded, be closed (session, and the like) VIII to deflwer (ھا a girl)
فض faḍḍ opening, breaking, undoing (e.g., of a real); dispersion, scattering, breaking up, routing; settlement, settling (of a dispute); conclusion, closure (e.g., of a session) │ البكارة فض f. al-bakāra defloration
فضة fiḍḍa silver
فضي fiḍḍī silver, silvery, argentic, argentous, made of silver, like silver; فضيات fiḍḍīyāt silverware │ الفضية الجمھورية (jumhūrīya) Argentina; الفضي الستار the motion-picture screen, the silver screen
مفض mifaḍḍ implement for opening or breaking open │ الخطابات مفض letter opener
انفضاض infiḍāḍ dissolution, breaking up, dispersal; end, close, conclusion, closure (e.g., of a session)
افتضاض iftiḍāḍ defloration
فضح faḍaḥa a (faḍḥ) to disclose or uncover
s.o. (ه) faults or offenses, expose, show up, compromise, shame, disgrace, dishonor (ه s.o.); to outshine, eclipse (ھ s.th., e.g., the moon the stars); to ravish, violate, rape (ھا a woman); to disclose, reveal, show, bring to light, divulge, betray (ھ s.th.) VII to be exposed, be compromised, be disgraced, be dishonored VIII to become public, become known, come to light │ امره افتضح (amruhū) he was exposed
فضح faḍḥ exposure, humiliation, mortification, debasement, degradation, disgracing, dishonoring
فضيح faḍīḥ covered with shame, exposed, compromised, humiliated, shamed, disgraced, dishonored; disgraceful, shameful, infamous, ignominious
فضيحة faḍīḥa exposure, humiliation, mortification, debasement, degradation,
disgracing, dishonoring; -- (pl. فضائح faḍā’iḥ ) disgraceful, or scandalous, act or thing; infamy, ignominy; shame, disgrace, scandal
فضاح faḍḍāḥ divulging secrets, unearthing shameful things
افتضاح iftiḍāḥ disgracefulness, ignominy, infamy
فاضح fāḍiḥ disgraceful, shameful, infamous, ignominious, dishonorable, discrediting, scandalous
مفضوح mafḍūḥ covered with shame, exposed, compromised, humiliated, shamed, disgraced, dishonored; disgraceful, shameful, infamous, ignominious
فضفاض faḍfāḍ wide, loose, flowing (garment); ample, abundant; plump, corpulent (girl); pompous, high-sounding, bombastic (speech)
فضل faḍala u and faḍila a (faḍl) to be surplus, be in excess, be left (over), remain; -- faḍala u (faḍl) to excel, surpass (على or ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to be excellent, superior, exquisite, good, be better, be more 717 adequate II to prefer (ه ھ، على s.o., s.th. to s.o., to s.th.), like better (ه ھ، s.o., s.th., على than); to give preference (ه ھ، على to s.o., to s.th. over), set s.o. or s.th. (ه ھ،) before or above (على) III to contend for precedence or superiority (ه with s.o.) │ شيئين بين فاضل to compare two things in order to determine which deserves preference IV to confer a benefit (على upon s.o.), do (على s.o.) a favor, oblige ( على s.o.); to present, honor (على ب s.o. with), bestow, confer (على ب upon s.o. s.th.), grant, award (على ب to s.o. s.th.) V = IV; to have the kindness (ب of doing or to do s.th.; or ف fa with finite verb), be so kind (ب as to do s.th.; or ف with finite verb), deign, condescend, be graciously disposed (ب to do s.th.; or ف with finite verb); (imperative) tafaḍḍal please! if you please; to put on house clothes, be dressed for around the house
فضل faḍl pl. فضول fuḍūl surplus, overplus, excess, superfluity, overflow; leftover, remainder, remnant, rest; matter of secondary importance, subordinate
 matter; -- pl. فضول that which is superfluous, redundant or in excess, a surplus, overplus, superfluity; waste, refuse; droppings, excrements; -- superiority (على over); precedence, priority (على over), preference (على to); grace, favor (على to, toward); kindness, graciousness, amiability; erudition, culture, refinement; -- (pl. افضال afḍāl) merit, desert (في on behalf of, with respect to), credit (for, in), service(s) (على to); benefit, favor, gift, present │ عن فضال (faḍlan) beside, aside from ..., not to speak of …, let alone ..., to say nothing of ...;
ذلك عن فضال besides, moreover, furthermore; بفضل thanks to, owing to, due to; فضلك من please! if you please; يرجع
الفضل في ذلك عائد or (yarji‘u) الفضل في ذلك he due, his is thereby merit the عليه ليس بالفضول ان it; for credit the all deserves فضول األحاديث ...; that superfluous not is it futile
talk, idle words; ان الكالم فضول من (f. il- kalām) it would be needless talk to ..., it would be a waste of words if ...
فضلة faḍla pl. faḍalāt remnant, remainder, residue, leftover, rest, surplus, overplus; waste, scrap, discard, offal, waste product; pl. excretions (physiol.), excrements
فضول fuḍūl curiosity, inquisitiveness, officiousness, meddling
فضولي fuḍūlī inquisitive, curious; busy- body, officious, meddlesome; prattler, chatterer; manager without commission, uncommissioned agent (Isl. Law)
فضولية fuḍūlīya inquisitiveness curiosity; obtrusiveness, importunity, officiousness, indiscreetness
فضيل faḍīl pl. فضالء fuḍalā’ outstanding, eminent, very good, first-rate, excellent; distinguished, deserving; learned, erudite
فضالة fuḍāla pl. -āt remnant, remainder, residue, leftover, rest, surplus, overplus; offal, refuse, scum
فضيلة faḍīla pl. فضائل faḍā’il  moral excellence, excellent quality, virtue; merit, advantage, excellence, exquisiteness │ الفضيلة صاحب title of Islamic scholars (as, for instance, Rector and sheiks of Al
Azhar University), also preceding the title of sheik: الشيخ فضيلة
افضل afḍal , f. فضلى fuḍlā, pl. m. -ūn, افاضل afāḍil , f. فضليات fuḍlayāt better, best; more excellent, preferable, etc.; افاضل (very) excellent, learned men; فضليات السيدات f. as-sayyidāt the worthy (or esteemed) ladies
افضلية afḍalīya precedence, priority (على over), preference (على to. over); predilection 718
مفضل mifḍal pre-eminent, most outstanding, most excellent, very generous, very liberal
مفضلة mifḍala pl. مفاضل mafāḍil  house dress, everyday dress
مفضال mifḍāl pre-eminent, most outstanding, most excellent; very generous, very liberal
تفضيل tafḍīl preference, preferment, favoring; esteem, high estimation │ اسم التفضيل ism at-t. noun of preference = elative (af‘āl ; gram.)
فضل mul/i44la compariaon, weighing
تفضل tafaḍḍul deigning, condescension, complaisance, courteousness, courtesy, favor, grace │ التفضل لبسة libsat at-t. careless manner of dressing for around the house
تفاضل tafāḍul rivalry for precedence; quantitative disparity (of two services rendered; Isl. Law) │ O التفاضل حساب differential calculus
O تفاضلي tafāḍulī differential (adj.)
فاضل fāḍil remaining, leftover, left, surplus, exceeding, in excess; (pl. فواضل fawāḍil ) remainder, remnant, residue, rest, leftover, surplus, overplus, excess; -- (pl. -ūn, فضالء fuḍalā’ ) outstanding, eminent, very good, first-rate, superior, excellent, distinguished, deserving; learned; man of culture and refinement
مفضل mufaḍḍal preferable, preferred (فضو and فضا (فضي faḍā u (فضو fuḍūw, فضاء
faḍā’) to be or become spacious, wide, large (space); to be empty, void, vacant II to empty, void, vacate (ھ s.th.) IV to come, attain (الى to), arrive (الى at), reach (
 الى s.o., s.th.); to lead (ب الى s.o. to; الى to, e.g., to results); to inform, notify (الى ب
s.o. of), announce (الى ب to s.o. s.th.) V to have free time, have leisure (ل for)
فضاء faḍā’ vast and unlimited space, empty space; space (phys.); cosmic space; sky; vast expanse, vastness, void │ سفينة الفضاء spaceship; الفضاء في به رمى to throw s.th. in the air; -- (pl. افضية afḍiya) open area, open tract of land, open country
spaceship سفينة فضائية faḍā’ī: فضائي
فاض fāḍin empty, vacated, vacant; unoccupied, not busy, at leisure, free (of commitments)
فطح faṭaḥa a (faṭḥ) and II to spread out, make broad and flat, flatten (ھ s.th.)
افطح afṭaḥ  and مفطح mufaṭṭaḥ broad- headed, broad-nosed
فطاحل faṭāḥil  (pl. of فطحل fiṭaḥl) important, outstanding, leading men or personalities, luminaries, celebrities, stars │ الفطحل زمن zaman al-fiṭaḥl primeval times, preadamic period
فطر faṭara u (faṭr) to split, cleave, break apart ( ھ s.th.); -- (فطور fuṭūr) to break the fast, eat and drink after a fast; to breakfast, have breakfast; -- (faṭr) to make, create, bring into being, bring forth (ھ s.th.; of God); to endow (ه على s.o. with; of God); pass. fuṭira to have a natural disposition ( على for); على فطر (fuṭira) ... is native of him, ... is in his nature IV to break the fast, eat and drink after a fast; to breakfast, have breakfast V to be split, be cleft, be broken VII = V; بالبكاء انفطر (bi-l-bukā’) to break into tears
فطر faṭr pl. فطور fuṭūr crack, fissure, rift, cleavage, rupture
فطر fiṭr fast breaking │ الفطر صدقة ṣadaqat al-f. almsgiving at the end of Ramadan (īsl. Law); الفطر عيد ‘īd al-f. Feast of Breaking the Ramadan Feast, or Lesser Bairam, celebrated on the 1  of Shawwal
فطر fuṭr (coll.; n. un.) fungi, mushrooms 719
فطري fuṯrī fungal, fungus, fungi-, myco- (in compounds); فطريات fuṯrīyāt parasitic fungi; mushrooms; fungal cultures │ الفطري المرض (maraḍ) mycosis
فطرة fiṭra creation; (pl. فطر fiṭar) nature, (natural) disposition, constitution, temperament, innate character, instinct; fiṭratan by nature
فطري fiṭrī natural; instinctive, native, inborn, innate │ الفطري اإلنسان (insān) natural man; الفطرية الديانات natural religions
فطور faṭūr breakfast
فطير faṭīr unleavened; immature, unbaked; fresh, new, newly made; unleavened bread
فطيرة faṭīra (coll. فطير faṭīr) pl. فطائر faṭā’ir (unleavened) bread; pastry made of water, flour and shortening (sometimes with sugar added); a cake-like white bread (made with eggs and butter; eg.)
faṭāyirīya فطايرية pl. faṭāyirī فطايري
(ṭun.) maker or seller of faṭira (see above)
faṭāṭirīya فطاطرية pl. faṭāṭirī فطاطري
(eg.) maker or seller of faṭira (see above)
افطار ifṭār fast breaking; breakfast; first meal after sunset during Ramadan
الفاطر a-fāṭir the Creator (= God)
فطس faṭasa i (فطوس fuṭūs) to die II to kill (ه s.o.); to suffocate, strangle, choke to death (ه s.o.) VII to become flattened (nose)
فطيس faṭīs suffocated, stifled
فطيسة faṭīsa pl. فطائس faṭā’is  corpse, body; carrion, carcass
افطس afṯas  flat-nosed, snub-nosed
فطم faṭama i (faṭm) to wean (ه s.o.; an infant or a young animal) VII to be weaned; to abstain (عن from)
فطام fiṭām weaning, ablactation فطيم faṭīm pl. فطم fuṭum weaned فاطمي fāṭimī Fatimid (adj. and n.);
Fatimids the الفاطميون
فطن faṭina a, faṭana u and faṭuna u (فطنة fiṭna) to be or become clever, smart, discerning, sagacious, perspicacious, bright, intelligent; to notice, realize, comprehend, understand (ب or ل or الى s.th.); to be or become aware (ب or ل or الى of); to think ( الى of s.th.) II to make intelligent (ه s.o.); to make (ه s.o.) realize or understand (ب، الى ل، s.th.), explain (ه الى ل، ب، to s.o.
 s.th.); to remind(ه الى ب، s.o. of) V to comprehend, understand (ل s.th.)
فطن faṭin clever, smart, astute, sagacious, perspicacious, bright, intelligent
فطنة fiṭna pl. fitan cleverness, astuteness, sagacity, perspicacity, acumen, intelligence
فطن faṭin pl. فطناء fuṭanā’  clever, smart, bright, intelligent
فطانة faṭāna cleverness, smartness تفطن tafaṭṭun intelligence; intellection فظ faẓẓ pl. افظاظ afẓāẓ crude, rude,
coarse, blunt, gruff, impolite, uncivil, uncouth, boorish, uneducated; -- walrus
فظاظة faẓāẓa crudeness, rudeness, coarseness, bluntness, gruffness, impoliteness, uncouthness, boorishness
فظع faẓa‘a u (فظاعة faẓā‘a) to be or become abominable, detectable, hideous, ugly, repulsive, disgusting, shooking, odious, heinous, atrocious, horrid, horrible X to find (ھ s.th.) abominable. detestable, etc. (see I); to call abominable, revolting, shocking (ھ s.th.)
فظع fazi‘ abominable, detectable, hideous, ugly, repulsive, disgusting, shocking, odious, heinous, atrocious, horrid, horrible 720
فظيع faẓī‘ abominable, detestable, hideous, ugly, repulsive, disgusting, shocking, odious, heinous, atrocious, horrid, horrible
فظاعة faẓā‘a pl. فظائع faẓā’i‘ , abominableness, hideousness, ugliness, repulsiveness, odiousness, heinousness, atrocity, horridness, horror; pl. atrocities
مفظع mufẓi‘ abominable, detestable, hideous, ugly, repulsive, disusting, shocking, odious, heinous, atrocious, horrid, horrible
فعل fa‘ala a (fa‘l, fi‘l) to do (ھ s.th.); to act; to perform, some activity; to have an influence or effect (في or ب on), affect (في or ب s.o., s.th.); to do (ب to s.o., s.th.; ھ في s.th. with) │ كريھا فعال فيه فعل (fi‘lan) to have an unpleasant effect on s.o. II to scan (ھ a verse) VI to interact, interplay;
(chem.) to enter into combination, form a compound; to combine (مع with) VII to be done; to be or become influenced or affected (ل by), be under the influence of
s.o. or s.th. (ل); to b. agitated, excited, upset VIII to concoct, invent, fabricate ( على كذبا (kidban kidban a lie against); to falsify, forge (ھ s.th., e.g., a handwriting); to invent (ھ s.th.)
فعل fi‘l activity, doing, work, action, performance; function; -- (pl. افعال af‘āl, فعال fi‘āl) deed, act, action; effect, impact;
-- (pl. افعال af‘āl) verb (gram.); pl. افاعيل afā‘īl  great deeds, exploits, feats; machinations │ فعال fi‘lan or بالفعل indeed, in effect, actually, really, practically; بالفعل out of, because of, due to
فعلي fi‘lī actual, factual, real; effective, efficacious, efficient; practical; de facto; verbal (gram.)
فعلة fa‘a pl. -āt deed, act, action
فعال fa‘‘āl effective, efficacious, efficient
فعالية fa‘‘ālīya effectiveness, efficacy, efficiency; activity
افعل af‘al  more effective, more efficacious
تفعيل taf‘īl pl. تفاعيل tafā‘īl  foot of a verse; (poet.) meter
تفاعل tafā‘ul pl. -āt interaction, interplay; formation of a chemical compound, chemical process. chemical reaction
انفعال infi‘āl (state of) being affected, acted upon, or influenced, passivity; stimulation. irritation (biol.); (pl. -āt) agitation. excitement, excitation, commotion
انفعالي infi‘ālī excitable, irritable, susceptible (biol.); caused by affect, affective (philos.)
انفعالية infi‘ālīya excitability, irritability (biol.)
فاعل fā‘il efective; efficacious, efficient; (pl. -ūn) doer, actor, perpetrator; (pl. فعلة fa‘ala) worker, workman, laborer; -- active subject of a verbal clause (gram.) │
 الفاعل اسم ism al-f. nomen agentis, active participle (gram.); فاعل راديوم ذو radioactive
فاعلية fā‘ilīya effectiveness, efficacy; activity
مفعول maf‘ūl object (gram.); به مفعول do.; -- (pl. مفاعيل mafā‘īl ) effect, impression, impact; effectiveness, validity
│ المفعول اسم ism al-m. nomen patientis, passive participle (gram.); مفعوله سرى sarā maf‘ūluhū to be or become effective, be valid (على for); المفعول ساري sārī l-m. valid (e.g., an identity card); رجعي مفعول (raj‘ī) retroactive force, retroactivity
منفعل munfa‘il excited, agitated, upset; irritable
مفتعل mufta‘al artificial, fabricated, forged, falsified, false, spurious 720
فعم IV to cram, jam, pack, fill to overflowing, fill up (ھ ب s.th. with)
مفعم muf‘am brimful, chock-full, filled to capacity or overflowing, replete, overfull, filled entirely, crammed, jampacked (ب with)
افعى af‘an f., pl. افاع afā‘in adder, viper, asp
افعوان uf‘uwān adder, viper, asp
فغرة fugra a u (fagr) to open (ھ the mouth) wide, gape VII to open wide, be agape (mouth)
فغرة fugra pl. فغر fugar mouth of a valley
فغفوري fagfūrī fine porcelain
فاغية fāgiya henna blossom
فقأ faqa’a a (< فق faq’) to knock out, gouge out (ھ an eye); to lance, open (ھ an abscess, and the like) │ عينيه فقأ (‘ainahū) to deal
s.o. (an opponent, an enemy) a heavy blow, ruin s.o. V to burst, explode, pop
فقحة faqḥa pl. فقاح fiqāḥ anus, anal orifice
فقد faqada i (faqd, فقدان fiqdān, fuqdān) to fail to find (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to lose (ه ھ، s.o.,
s.th.); to have lost, miss (ھ, s.o., s.th.); not to have (ھ s.th.), be bereaved (ه of s.o.), be deprived, bereft, destitute (ھ of s.th.); to mislay, have mislaid (ھ s.th.); to miss (ھ an opportunity, and the like) │ صوابه فقد (ṣawābahū) to go out of one’s mind IV to cause (ه s.o.) to lose or miss or forfeit (ھ
s.th.); to bereave, deprive, dispossess, rob (ه ھ s.o. of s.th.) V to seek (ھ s.th.), look, search (ھ for s.th.); to examine, study, survey, inspect, check, investigate (ھ s.th.); to visit (ھ s.th.), review, inspect (ھ troops, and the like) VIII = V; to miss (,ھ ه s.o., s.th.) X to miss (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.)
فقد faqd loss; bereavement
فقيد faqīd lost, missing; dead, deceased; deceased person │ العلم فقيد f. al-‘ilm one whose death is deplored by science; الفقيد الراحل the deceased
فقد fiqdān, fuqdān loss; bereavement │ الصواب فقدان f. aṣ-ṣawāb folly, madness; الذاكرة فقدان loss of memory, amnesia
تفقد tafaqqud pl. -āt examination, study, survey, inspection, check, investigation; review, inspection (e.g., of troops); visit
افتقاد iftiqā examination, study, survey, inspection, check, investigation; review, inspection (e.g., of troops); visit
فاقد fāqid devoid, destitute, bereft, deprived (of s.th.; with foll. genitive), bereaved (of s.o.; with foll. genitive);
-less, un-, in-; loser │ الشعور فاقد unconscious; insensible, senseless; فاقد الضمير unconscionable, unscrupulous, unhesitating; التھذيب فاقدو people without education, unmannered people
مفقود mafqūd lost, missing, nonexistent, absent, lacking, wanting; missing person
متفقد mutafaqqid controller, inspector
فقر faqara u i (faqr) to pierce, bore, perforate ( ھ s.th.); -- faqura u (فقارة faqāra) to be or become poor, needy II to pierce, bore, perforate (ھ s.th.) IV to make poor, impoverish (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), reduce (ه s.o.) to poverty; to put (ه s.o.) in need (الى of s.th.) VIII to become poor; to need (الى s.o., s.th.), lack, require (الى s.th.), be in need, be in want (الى of s.o., of s.th.)
فقر faqr poverty; need, lack, want
فقرة fiqra pl. fiqrāt, fiqarāt, فقر fiqar vertebra; section, paragraph, passage, article
السلسلة │ vertebral spinal, fiqrā فقري spine, (‘amūd) العمود الفقري or (silsila) الفقرية
 vertebral column; فقرية حيوانات (ḥayawānāt) vertebrates 722
فقار faqār (coll.; n. un. ة) vertebra;
faqār spine, vertebral column
فقير faqīr spinal, vertebral │ السلسلة الفقارية (silsila) spine, vertebral column
فقير faqīr pl. فقراء fuqarā’  poor, poverty-stricken; poor man, pauper; mendicant dervish, Sufi mendicant
افتقار iftiqār need, requirement, want, lack (الى of)
فقوس faqqūs a kind of large cucumber (= فقوص) مفقس mifqas pl. مفاقس mafāqis  incubator
فقش faqaāa i (faqš) to break, crush (ھ s.th.)
فقش faqš: فقش لوز (lauz) thin-shelled almonds
فقص II to hatch, incubate (ھ an egg; of a bird)
فقوص faqūṣ (coll.; n. un. ة) a kind of large cucumber
آلة │ incubation hatching, tafqīṣ تفقيص آلة التفقيص or il-baiḍ) (t. لتفقيص البيض incubator
فقط II: الحساب فقط faqqaṭa l-ḥisāba to write the word فقط faqaṭ “only” after the total on an invoice so as to prevent fraudulent additions; to spell out the figures of an invoice
فقط faqaṭ only, no more (postpositive); altogether, total (after figures)
فقع faqa‘a a to burst, pop, explode II to crack, snap, pop VII = faqa‘a
فقاعة fuqqā‘a pl. فقاقيع faqāqī‘  bubble
فاقع fāqi‘ bright yellow; bright, intense, brilliant, vivid (color)
فاقعة fāqi‘a pl. فواقع fawāqi‘  blister, vesicle; pustule
فقم faqima a (faqam, faqm, فقوم fuqūm), faquma u (فقامة faqāma) and VI to be or become grave, serious, critical, dangerous, increase dangerously, become aggravated, reach alarming proportions, come to a head
فقم fuqqam, fuqm (coll.; n. un. ة) seal (zool.)
تفاقم tafāqum aggravation, increasing gravity
فقنس faqnas phoenix
فقه faqiha a (fiqh) to understand, comprehend ( ھ s.th.); -- faqiha a (fiqh) and faquha u ( فقاھة faqāha) to have knowledge, esp., have legal knowledge II to teach (ه s.o.), instruct (ه في s.o. in) IV to teach (ه ھ s.o. s.th.), instruct (ه ھ s.o. in s.th.) V to understand, comprehend (ھ s.th.); to study the fiqh (q.v.); to apply o.s. to the acquisition of knowledge (في in), study (في s.th.), devote one’s studies to (في), work at or on s.th. (في); to gain information, get a clear picture, obtain a clear idea
فقه fiqh understanding, comprehension; knowledge; الفقه jurisprudence in Islam, fiqh │ اللغة فقه f. al-luga (indigenous,
Arabic) philology
فقھي fiqhī juristic(al); relating to jurisprudence in Islam
فقيه faqīh pl. فقھاء fuqahā’  legist, jurisprudent (and theologian), expert of fiqh (q.v.); -- (popular usage; eg., pronounced fiqī) reciter of the Koran; elementary school teacher
فك fakka (1  pers. perf. fakaktu) u (fakk) to separate, disjoin, disconnect, sever, sunder (ھ s.th.); to break (open) (ھ s.th., e.g., a seal); to open (ھ s.th., e.g., the hand); to dislocate, disjoint (ھ s.th., e.g., a bone); to take apart, disassemble, dismount, take to pieces, disintegrate, break up, decompose, dismember, fragmentize (ھ s.th.); to dismantle, tear 723 down (ھ s.th.); to untie. unbind, unfasten, undo (ھ s.th.); to detach, disengage, take off (ھ من s.th. from); to unbutton (ھ s.th.); to unscrew (ھ s.th.); to lift, raise (الحجز al-ḥajza the confiscation, عن of s.th.); to solve (ھ s.th., e.g., a problem); (eg.) to change (ھ money); -- fakka (1  pers. perf. fakaktu) u (fakk, فكاكز fikāk, fakāk) to ransom, redeem, buy off, liberate, emancipate, release, set free (ه s.o.); -- fakkka u (fakk, فكوك fukūk) to redeem (ھ s.th., e.g., a pledge) II to loosen, unfasten (ھ s.th.); to take to pieces, take apart, disassemble, dismount ( ھ s.th.); to disrupt, shatter, fragmentize (ھ s.th.) V to be taken apart, be
 disassembled, be dismounted; to be disrupted, be shattered, be fragmentized; to break apart (e.g., a ship); to split, fissure, fission, break up, dissolve, disintegrate, come apart VII to be separated, be disjoined, be disconnected, be loosened, be unfastened, be undone, be untied, be unbound, be unbuttoned, be unscrewed; to separate o.s., detach o.s. disengage o.s. (من from), rid o.s. (من of) │ ينفك لم (with foll. imperf. or predicative aco.) not to atop doing, keep doing VIII to redeem (ھ s.th., e.g., a pledge); to dissolve, break up, separate, disintegrate, destroy (ھ s.th.); to snatch away (ھ من s.th. from s.o.)
فك fakk redemption (of a pledge); (pl. فكوك fukūk) jawbone, jaw │ األسفل الفك the lower jaw, mandible; األعلى الفك (a‘lā) the upper jaw, maxilla
فكة fakka small change, coins
فكاك fikāk, fakāk disengagement; redemption, liberation, emancipation, release; ransom
مفك mifakk pl. -āt screw driver
تفكيك tafkīk fragmentation, dismemberment, decomposition │ O تفكيك الذرة t. ad-darra nuclear fission
تفكك tafakkuk fragmentation, breakup, dissolution, disruption, rupture, disunion, split; disintegration, decomposition
انفكاك infikāk disengagement
افتكاك iftikāk redemption (of a pledge)
مفكوك mafkūk loose
مفكك mufakkak disconnected, disjointed, incoherent (words, phrases)
فكر fakara u i (fakr) to reflect, meditate, cogitate, ponder, muse, speculate (في on), revolve in one’s mind, think over, contemplate, consider (في s.th.); to think ( في of, also ب) II = I; to remind (في or ه ھ
s.o. of) IV = I; V to reflect, meditate, cogitate, ponder, muse, speculate (في on), revolve in one’s mind, think, over, contemplate, consider (في s.th.); to think ( في of) VIII = V; to remember, recall, recollect (ه ,ھ s.o., s.th.)
فكر fikr pl. افكار afkār thinking, cogitation, reflection, meditation, speculation, contemplation, consideration; thought, ideas, notion, concept; opinion, view │ الفكر شارد absent-minded, distracted; الفكر مشوش mušawwaš al-f. confused, bewildered, perplexed, dismayed, embarrassed
فكرة fikra pl. فكر fikar thought, idea, notion, concept; qualm, scruple, demur, hesitation │ الفكرة صاحب (father to the thought =) the originator, author; فكرة على (eg.) incidentally …, by the way ..., speaking of ..., apropos (of) ...
فكرى fikrī ideational, ideative, speculative, mental; intellectual
فكير fakīr pensive, meditative, cogitative, thoughtful
تفكير tafkīr thinking, cogitation, meditation, reflection; speculation, contemplation, consideration; thought 724
تفكر tafakkur thinking, cogitation, meditation, reflection; speculation, contemplation, consideration
مفكر mufakkir thinking, reflecting, meditating, pondering, musing; pensive, meditative, cogitative; thinker
مفكرة يومية │ notebook mufakkira مفكرة
(yaumīya) diary, journal
مفكرات mufakarāt thoughts, considerations
فكش fakaša u to sprain VII to be sprained
فكه fakiha a (fakah, فكاھة fakāha) to be or become gay, merry, cheerful, sportive, jocular, humorous II to amuse (ه s.o.) with jokes III to joke, jest, make fun (ه with), banter (ه s.o.) V to amuse o.s., have fun (ب with), be amused (ب by); to joke, make fun
فكه fakih gay, merry, gleeful, jolly, cheerful, sportive, fun-loving, jocular, humorous; amusing (thing)
فكاھة fukāha joking, jesting, fun- making; humor
فكاھي fukāhī humorous, humoristic; humorist
 افكوھة ufkūha joking, jesting, fun- making; humor; pl. افاكيه afākīh  jokes, jests, pranks, antics
تفكھة tafkiha amusement, exhilaration, delectation
مفاكھة mufākaha bantering talk, joking, kidding
تفكه tafakkuh delight, enjoyment, amusement, diversion; humorous talk, joking, banter
فاكه fākih gay, merry, gleeful, jolly, funny; humorous
فاكه fākiha (coll.) pl. فواكه fawākih 
fruit(s)
فاكھاني fākihānī fruit seller, fruit dealer
 فل falla u (fall) to dent, notch, blunt (ھ s.th., e.g., a sword); to break (ھ s.th.); -- falla to flee, run away │ غربه فل (garbahū), حدته من فل (ḥiddatihī) and فل حديده to weaken s.o.; to dampen, subdue s.o.; شباه من فل (šabāhu) to weaken s.o. II to dent, notch, blunt (ھ s.th., e.g., a sword)
فل fall pl. فلول fulūl dent, notch, jag; -- fall (for sg. and pl.) pl. فلول fulūl, افالل aflāl, فالل fullāl defeated, vanquished; scattered remnants of an army
مفلول maflūl dented, jagged, notched, blunt
 فل fill, full (eg.) Arabian jasmine (Jasminum sambac L.; bot.)
 فل fall, fill cork
 فلة villa pl. -āt villa, country house
فلمنكي see فالمنكى
فلت falata i (falt) to escape (من s.o., s.th.;  from), slip away, get away (من from s.o., from s.th.); to he freed, he set free, be released, be liberated, he set at liberty; to let (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) escape or slip away or get away, let loose, free, release, liberate, set free, set at liberty (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) IV = I; V to escape (من s.o., s.th.; from), slip away, get away (من from s.o., from s.th.); to free o.s., extricate o.s. (من from); to be freed, be set free, be released, be liberated, be set at liberty VII to escape (من s.o., s.th.; from), slip away, get away (من from s.o., from s.th.); to free o.s., extricate o.s. (
من from); to he finished (من with); to be freed, he set free, he released, he liberated, he set at liberty
فلت falat escape
فلتة falta pl. falatāt unexpected event, unexpected, turn; extravagance; slip, oversight, error. lapse; faltatan suddenly, unexpectedly 725
فالتي falātī pl. فالتية falātīya (eg.) licentious, wanton, dissolute, debauched; debauchee, libertine, roué, rake; good-for- nothing, ne’er-do-well
افالت aflāt escape
انفالت infilāt escape
فالت fālit escaped, free, at liberty, at large; escapee; (pl. فلتاء fu1atā’ ) licentious, wanton, dissolute, debauched; debauchee, libertine, roué, rake; good-for- nothing, ne’er-do-well
  فلج falaja u i (falj) to split, cleave (ھ s.th.); pass. fulija to be semiparalyzed II to split, cleave (ھ s.th.) VII to be semiparalyzed
فلج falj pl. فلوج fulūj crack, split, crevice, fissure, cleft, rift
فالج fālij semiparalysis, hemiplegia
مفلوج maflūj semiparalyzed, hemiplegic
 فيلج pl. فيالج look up alphabetically
finjān فنجان = filjān فلجان □
فلح falaḥa a (falḥ) to split, cleave (ھ s.th.); to plow, till, cultivate (األرض al-arḍa the land) │ يفلح بالحديد الحديد ان (yuflaḥu) lit.: iron is cleft with iron, i.e., approx.: rudeness must be met with rudeness IV and X to thrive, prosper, become happy; to have luck or success, be lucky, be successful في in, with)
فالح falāḥ thriving, prosperity; salvation; welfare; success
فالحة filāḥa cultivation, tillage; agriculture, farming, husbandry
فالح fallāḥ pl. -ūn, فالحة fallāḥa tiller of the soil, husbandman; peasant, farmer, fellah
فالحة fallāḥa pl. -āt peasant woman; peasant girl
 فالحي fallāḥī peasant’s, farmer’s, farming, country, rural, rustic, agricultural
فالح fāliḥ lucky, fortunate, successful
مفلح mufliḥ lucky, fortunate, successful; one who prospers, one who is well off
 فلذة  filda pl. filadāt, فلذ filad, افالذ aflād a piece (of meat) │ كبذه فلذة f. kabidihī his own blood, his own child; األرض افالذ a. al-ard the hidden treasures of the earth
 فوالذ and فوالذي look up alphabetically
فلور look up alphabetically
فلز filizz, filazz pl. -āt (nonprecious) metal
فلس II to declare (ه s.o.) bankrupt or insolvent IV to be or become bankrupt or insolvent, to fail; to be ruined
فلس fals (colloq. pronounced fils) pl. فلوس fulūs fels, a small coin, in Iraq and Jordan = 1/1000 of a dinar; pl. فلوس (eg.) money; scales (of a fish)
تفليس taflīs (n. vic. ة) declaration of bankruptcy; (pl. تفاليس tafālīs ) bankruptcy, insolvency, failure │ التفليسة مأمور receiver (in bankruptcy; Eg.)
افالس iflās bankruptcy, insolvency, failure
مفلس muflis pl. مفاليس mafālīs  bankrupt, insolvent
فلسطين filāsṭīn  Palestine
فلسطيني filasṭīnī Palestinian; (pl. -ūn) a Palestinian
فلسف falsafa to philosophize II tafalsafa do.; to pretend to be a philosopher
فلسف falsafa philosophy
فلسفي fallafī philosophic(al)
falāsifa فالسفة pl. failasūf فيلسوف
philosopher
مفلسف mufalsif pl. -ūn philosopher
متفلسف mutafalsif philosophaster, philosophist 726
ڤلط volṭ pl. اڤالط avlāṭ volt (el.)
فلطح falṭaḥa to make broad, broaden, flatten(ھ s.th.)
فلطاح filtāḥ broad, flattened, flat
مفلطح mufalṭiḥ broad, flattened, flat
فلع fala‘a a (fal‘) to split, cleave, rend, tear asunder (ھ s.th.) II do.
فلع fal‘, fil‘ pl. فلوع fulū‘ crack, split, crevice, fissure, cleft, rift
فلفل falfala to pepper (ھ s.th.)
فلفل fulful, filfil (coll.; n. un. ة) pepper;
n. un. فلفلة peppercorn │ احضر فلفل (ahḍar) green peppers; دارفلفل dārafilfil (eg.) a variety of pepper (Piper Chaba Hout.; bot.)
فلفلي fulfulī, filfilī pepperlike, peppery, pepperish
مفلفل mufalfal peppered
فلق falaqa i (falq) to split, cleave, rive, sunder, tear asunder (ھ s.th.); to cause (ھ dawn) to break, dispel the shadows of night (of God) II to split, cleave, rive, sunder, tear asunder (ھ s.th.) V to be split, be cleft, be torn apart; to split, cleave, crack, fissure, be or become cracked, be full of cracks or fissures VII = V; to burst; to break (dawn); (eg.) infaliq go hang yourself! go to hell!
فلق falq pl. فلوق faq crack, split, crevice, fissure, cleft, rift
فلق falaq daybreak, dawn
فلقة filqa pl. فلق filaq one half (of a split thing)
فلقة falaqa a device for holding the legs of the delinquent during the bastinado
فالق fallāq pl. ة bandit, highwayman, highway robber
فليق failaq pl. فيالق fayāliq  a large military unit; army corps; corps
 فلك II to have round breasts (girl); (syr.) to predict the future, prophecy
فلك falak pl. افالك aflāk celestial sphere; celestial body, star; circuit, orbit (of celestial bodies) │ الفلك علم ‘ilm al-f. astronomy; astrology
فلك fulk (m. and f.) ship, (also coll.) ships; (Noah’s) Ark
فلكي falakī astronomic(al); astrologic(al) (pl. -un, فلكية falakīya) astronomer, astrologer │ الفلك عالم do.
 مفلوك maflūk ill-starred, unlucky, unfortunate
مفلك mufallik girl with round breasts
  فلوكة falūka pl. فالئك falā’ik  sloop, felucca; boat
boatman )فاليكي( falā’ikī فالئكي
فلكن falkana to vulcanize (ھ s.th.)
فلم film pl. افالم aflām film; motion picture │ فلم مجسم (mujassam) 3 D film; ملون فلم (mulawwan) color film; ناطق فلم sound film
فلمندي falamandī Flemish; Fleming
فلمنكي falamankī Dutch, Hollandish, Netherlander
  فالن fulān, f. فالنة fulāna  (substituting for an unnamed or unspecified person or thing) so-and-so
في │ above the of adjective fulānī فالني hour an such and such at الساعة الفالنية
  فلين look up alphabetically
فلندرة falandra Flanders
فلنكة falanka pl. -āt (railroad) tie, sleeper (eg.)
افالء pl. fuluw faluw, فلو aflā’; افالء pl. filw فلو
aflā, فالوى falāwā colt, foal 727
فال falan (coll.; n. un. فالة falāh) pl. فلوات falawāt, افالء aflā’ waterless desert; open country; open space
المفالي al-mafālī the pastures, the grazing grounds
فلور filūr fluorine (chem.)
O مفلور mufalwir fluorescent
 فلى falā i (faly) to delouse, search for lice (ھ s.th.); to examine, scrutinize, investigate ( ھ s.th.) II to delouse, search for lice, rid of lice (ھ s.th.) V to louse o.s.
فالية fāliya spotted dung beetle; touchhole (of old-time firearms)
 فليا fulayyā = فلية (see below)
الفليبين al-filībīn the Philippine Islands
فلين fallīn and فلينة fallīna cork
فليه , فلية fulayya (eg.) pennyroyal (Mentha pulegium L.; bot.)
فليون falyūn godchild (Chr.)
فم fam (construct state also فو fū) pl. افواه afwāh; (eg.) fumm pl. افمام afmām mouth; muzzle; orifice, aperture, hole, vent; mouth, embouchure (of a river), head (of a canal, etc.); mouthpiece (esp., of a cigarette, of a pipe, etc.); cigarette holder │ الحوت فم fam al-ḥūt star α in the constellation Piecis Australis, Fomalhaut; الفم آالت wind instruments
فن II to diversify, vary, variegate (ھ s.th.), bring variety or diversity (ھ into s.th.); to mix, mingle, jumble (ھ s.th.) V to be or become manifold, multifarious, varied, variegated, diverse, many-sided, versatile; to use different kinds; to be a specialist, an expert, a master (في in a field), master (في s.th.) VIII = V
فن fann pl. فنون funūn, افنان afnān, افانين afānīn  kind, specimen, variety; pl. افانين Various sides (of s.th.), diversity │ افانين من all kinds of, sundry, various; فنون الجنون (junūn) insanity has many varieties, manifests itself in many ways; -- (pl. فنون funūn) scientific discipline, field of work, special field, specialty; art │ الحربي الفن (ḥarbī) art of war, strategy; الجميلة الفنون or الرفيعة الفنون or O المستظرفة الفنون (mustaẓrafa) the fine arts; المكتبات فن f. al- maktabāt library science; الصحفي الفن (ṣuḥfī) science of journalism; journalism
فني fannī specialist(ic); expert, professional; technical; artistic(al); tactical, strategic(al); technician; artist
فنية fannīya artistry
فنن fanan pl. افنان afnān branch, twig (of a tree), of a shrub)
فنان fannān pl. -ūn artist │ O فنان عامل pl. فنانون عمال (‘umm`al) artistic handicraftsman, commercial artist
فنانة fannāna woman artist
افنون ufnūn pl. افانين afānīn  branch, twig (of a tree)
تفنن tafannun diversity, variety, multiplicity, multifariousness; many- sidedness, versatility (في in); varied activity, activity in various fields; mastery; skillful, workmanlike or chic manner
 افتنان iftinān diversity, variety, multiplicity, multifariousness; many- sidedness, versatility (في in); varied activity, activity in various fields; mastery
متفنن mutafannin many-sided, versatile
مفتن muftann masterful, expert, mastering one’s field
فنار fanār pl. -āt lighthouse
فنجان = fanājīl  فناجيل pl. finjāl فنجال
فناجين pl. finjāna فنجانة and finjān فنجان جعل زوبعة في │ cup coffee cup; fanājīn  tempest a cause to (zauba‘alan) فنجان ٨٢٧ teapot a in
فنجر fanjara: عينيه فنجر (‘ainaihi) to stare, glare (في at s.o., at s.th.)
فنخ fanaka a to squeeze (ھ s.th.); to invalidate, nullify, void (ھ s.th.); to break (ھ a contract, an agreement)
فند II to call (ه s.o.) a liar, prove (ه s.o.) wrong, disprove, confute, refute, rebut (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to classify, specify (ھ s.th., e.g., the items of an invoice); to detail, particularize, itemize (ھ s.th.) IV to prove (ه s.o.) wrong; to disprove, confute, refute, rebut (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.)
فندق funduq pl. فنادق fanādiq  hotel, inn
فنار pl. -āt look up alphabetically
فانوس pl. فوانيس look up alphabetically
فنط II to detail, particularize, itemize, enumrate item by item (ھ s.th.)
فنطاس finṭās pl. فناطيس fanāṭīs  water tank, reservoir, cistern; large container
فنطيس finṭīs pl. فناطيس fanāṭīs  broad- nosed
فنطيسة finṭīsa pl. فناطيس fanāṭīs  snout (of swine)
فنغراف funugrāf pl. –āt phonograph
فنق V to live in ease and affluence
 فنك fanak fennec (zool.)  فنيك look up alphabetically فنلندا finlandā Finland
فنلندي finlandī Finnish; Finn
فني faniya a (فناء fanā’) to pass away, perish, cease to exist, come to nought; to come to
an end, cease, wane, dwindle, evanesce, vanish; to be extinguished, become extinct; to be exhausted, be consumed, be spent; to undergo obliteration of the self; to become totally absorbed (في by) │ ال يفنى imperishable, inexhaustible IV to annihilate, bring to nought, ruin, destroy ( ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to exhaust, consume, wear out, spend (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to cause (ھ s.th.) to become absorbed or consumed (ھ by) VI to annihilate each other; to be consumed (في by), lose o.s. (في in), identify o.s. completely (في with); to dedicate o.s. with heart and soul, give o.s. over wholeheartedly (في to some activity)
فناء fanā’ passing away, cessation of being; perdition, ruin, destruction, annihilation; evanescence, vanishing, termination, extinction; exhaustion; nonbeing, nonexistence, nonentity; extinction of individual consciousness, recedence of the ego, obliteration of the self (myst.)
فناء finā’ pl. افنية afniya courtyard; open space in front or at either side of a house; open hall │ فناء رحابة raḥābat al-f. hospitable reception, generous entertainment; الغرفة فناء في يخطو سار (yakṭū,
f. il-gurfa) he walked about the room
افناء ifnā’ annihilation, ruination, ruin, destruction
تفان tafānin mutual annihilation; self- denial, self-sacrifice (in an activity)
فان fānin evanescent, transitory, transient, ephemeral, vain; exhausted; far advanced in years, very old
فنيقي finīqī Phoenician
finīqiyā فنيقيا and finīqīya  فنيقية
Phoenicia
فنيك (Fr. phénique) finīk phenol, carbolic acid, also الفنيك حامض
فھاھة fahāha weakness, impotence
فھد fahd pl. فھود fuhūd, افھد afhud lynx (also the term for cheetah and panther) 729
فھرس fahrasa (فھرسة fahrasa) to compile an index (كتابا for a book), to index (كتابا a
book)
 فھرس fihris and فھرست fihrist pl. فھارس fahāris  table of contents, index; catalogue; list
فھم fahima a (fahm, faham) to understand, comprehend, realize (ھ s.th.); to note (ھ s.th.), take note, take cognizance (ھ of s.th.); to hear, learn (من ھ of s.th. from), be informed (من ھ of s.th. by); عنه فھم to understand s.o., understand what s.o. says or means │ ان يفھم (yufhamu) it is reported, it is said that …, we understand that ... II to make (ه s.o.) understand or see (ھ s.th.), instruct (ھ ه s.o. in s.th.), give (ه ھ s.o. s.th.) to understand IV = II; V to try to understand or comprehend (ھ s.th.); to understand gradually, come to understand (ھ s.th.); to penetrate, fathom (ھ s.th.); to understand, comprehend (ھ s.th.) VI to understand one another; to communicate with each other; to reach an understanding, come to an agreement, come to terms (مع with, على in, about); to be comprehended, be understood VIII to understand, comprehend (ھ s.th.) X to inquire (عن or s. of s.o. about s.th.), ask ( عن or ھ s.o. s.th. or about s.th.)
فھم fahm pl. افھام afhām understanding; comprehension. grasp; perceptive faculty, perceptivity; brains, intellect; discernment, acumen, penetration, insight, intelligence │ الفھم سوء sū’ al-f. misapprehension, misunderstanding
فھم fahim quick-witted, of acute discernment
فھيم fahīm pl. فھماء fuhamā’  discerning, judicious, sensible, intelligent
فھامة fahāma very understanding, extremely sympathetic
تفھيم tafhīm instruction, orientation
تفھم tafahhum gradual understanding; understanding, comprehension, grasping, grasp
تفاھم tafāhum mutual understanding, mutual agreement, concurrence, accord; understanding (مع with, على on, about);
agreement, arrangement (مع with) │ التفاھم سوء sū’ at-t. (mutual) misunderstanding, discord, disharmony, dissension
استفھام istifhām inquiry (عن about; also على); question │ االستفھام عالمة ‘alāmat al- ist. question mark
استفھامي istifhāmī interrogative (gram.)
مفھوم mafhūm understood; comprehensible, intelligible, understandable; known; sense, meaning, signification; (pl. مفاھيم mafāhīm ) notion, concept │ بالمفھوم in the literal sense, literally; unequivocally, unambiguously, clearly; ان المفھوم it is said, it is reported that …
فو fū see فم fam
فوال (Fr.) fuwāl voile (dress material)
فوة fuwa (eg.) madder (Rubia tinctorum L.;
bot.)
فوت) فات) fāta u (faut, فوات fawāt) to pass away, vanish; to be over, be past; to go by s.o. ( ه), pass s.o. (ه); to escape, elude (ه s.o.), slip away; to abandon, give up, leave behind, relinquish (ھ s.th.); to anticipate, forestall (ه s.o.); to exceed, surpass (ه ب
s.o. by) │ الوقت فات (waqt) it is (too) late; ان فاته it escaped him that ...; he omitted, neglected, failed, or forgot to ...; he failed to see that ..., he overlooked the fact that
…; ان يفته لم (yafuthu) he did not fail to ..., he did not neglect to ...; الفرصة فاتته fātatu l-furṣatu he missed the opportunity; فاته القطار he missed the train II to make (ھ s.th.) escape (على s.o.); to cause (على s.o.) to miss (ھ s.th.); to let (ه s.o.) pass; to
alienate, sell (ھ s.th., tun.) IV to make 730 (ھ s.th.) escape (ه s.o.); to make (ه s.o.) miss (ھ s.th.) VI to differ, be different, be dissimilar VIII to offend against s.th. ( على), act contrary to (على), belie, betray ( على s.th.)
فوت faut escape; -- (pl. افوات afwāt) distance, interval; difference
فوات fawāt passing, lapse │ األجل فوات f. al-ajal the passing of the appointed time, expiration of the deadline; بالمدة الفوات (bi- l-mudda) superannuation; الوقت فوات بعد األوان)) (f. il-waqt, il-awān) too late; قبل األوان) الوقت فوات) before it is too late
فويت fuwait (m. and f.) one following his, or her, own opinion only, acting in his, or her, way only
 تفويت tafwīt pl. -āt alienation, transfer, sale (tun.)
تفاوت tafāwut difference, dissimilarity, disparity, contract; disharmony
افتيات iftiyāt treason (على to), betrayal (
على of), offense (على against)
فائت fā’it past, elapsed (time); passing; transitory, transient; passerby
متفاوت mutafāwit different
فوتوغرافيا (It. fotografia) fotūgrāJfiyā
photography
فوتوغرافي fotūgrāfiya photographic; photographer
فوتيه (Fr. fauteuil) fūtēh pl. -āt armchair, fauteuil
فوج fauj pl. افواج afwāj group, crowd, troop, band; detachment; party; shift (in a mine); battalion (Ir. till 1922; Syr., Leb.); regiment (Ir. since 1922); افواجا afwājan in droves, in crowds │ الفوج تبدل tabaddul al-
f. change of shift
فوح) فاح) fāḥa u (fauḥ, فوحان fawaḥān) to diffuse an aroma, exhale a pleasant odor, be fragrant; to spread, diffuse, emanate (fragrance) │ القداسة شذا منه فاح (šāda l- qadāja) he was reputed to be a holy man
فوحة fauḥa fragrant emanation, breath of fragrance
فواح fawwāḥ exhaling, diffusing (fragrance)
فود faud pl. افوھد afwād temple; hair around the temples
 فور) فار) fāra u (faur, فور fawarān) to boil, simmer, bubble; to boil over (also fig.); to effervesce, fizz; to flare up, burst into passion; to gush forth, well forth, gush up, shoot up (water from the ground) II to make (ھ s.th.) boil (also fig., e.g., the blood); to excite, stir up (ھ s.th.) IV to make (ھ s.th.) boil
فور faur boiling, simmering, bubbling, ebullition, etc. (see I); فورا fauran at once, right away, instantly, forthwith, on the spot, without delay, promptly, immediately, directly; فور faura (prep.) immediately after │ الفور من or من) فوره من فورھا etc.) or الفور على at once, right away,
instantly, forthwith, on the spot, without delay, promptly, immediately, directly
فورى faurī prompt, instantaneous, instant, immediate, direct
فورة faura flare-up, outburst, tantrum
فوار fawwār boiling up, ebullient; effervescent, fizzing; bubbling (spring, etc.); foaming, frothy; hot-headed, irascible
فوارة fawwāra spring, fountain, jet d’eau
فوران fawarān boiling, simmering, bubbling, ebullition; flare· up, outburst
فائرة fā’ira uproar, riot; commotion, agitation, excitement 731
 فار pl. فيران and فارة look up alphabetically
furša فورشة = فورشة
فورشينة (It. forcina) furšīna hairpin
alphabetically up look فوريقة = فاوريقة
فوز) فاز) fāza u (fauz) to be successful, be victorious, triumph; to attain, achieve, accomplish, obtain, gain, win (ب s.th.); to defeat, beat (على an opponent, ب with; sports, etc.); to escape (من s.th.) │ فاز ما بطائل (bi-ṭā’ilin) to fail, be unsuccessful, accomplish nothing II to cross the desert, travel through or in the desert
فوز success, triumph, victory; obtainment, attainment, achievement, accomplishment; escape
مفازة mafāza pl. -āt, مفاوز mafāwiz 
desert
فائز fā’iz successful, victorious, triumphant; victor, winner
فائزة fā’iza victress, winner
fa’s فأس = fās فاس
فوسفات fusfāt phosphate
فاشي and فاشية look up alphabetically
فوصفور fuṣfūr phosphorus
فوض II to entrust, consign, commit (ل ھ or الى
to s.o. s.th.); to entrust, charge (ل ھ or الى
s.o. with), commission s.o. (ل or الى) to do s.th. (ھ); to authorize, empower, delegate (ل or الى s.o.), give full power (ل or الى to s.o.) ill to negotiate (ھ s.th.), treat, parley,
 confer (في on, about, مع ه، with) VI to negotiate or treat or parley with one another, confer (في on, about); to negotiate (في s.th.), treat, parley, confer (في on, about; مع with)
فوضى fauḍā disorder, disarray, confusion, tohubohu, chaos; anarchy
فوضوي fauḍawī anarchic; chaotic
فوضوية fauḍawīya anarchism
تفويض tafwīḍ entrustment, commitment, consignment, commission(ing), charging; authorization, empowerment, delegation of authority; authority, warrant, authorization, mandate, mandatory power, procuration, proxy, power of attorney │ تام) مطلق تفويض) (muṭlaq, tāmm) general power of attorney, unlimited authority; التفويض وثيقة warrant of attorney
مفاوضة mufāwaḍa pl. -āt negotiation, parley, talk, conference; partnership (Isl. Law) │ المفاوضات باب فتح to open negotiations
مفوض mufawwaḍ authorized agent, deputy, proxy, mandatory; commissioner
│ مفوض وزير minister plenipotentiary (dipl.); السامي المفوض (sāmī) the High Commissioner (formerly in Syr.)
مفوضية mufawwaḍīya pl. -āt legation (dipl.); commissariat │ العليا المفوضية (‘ulyā) the High Commissariat (formerly in Syr.); المفوضية مستشار mustašār al-m. counselor of legation (dipl.)
فوطة fūṭa pl. فوط fuwaṯ apron. pinafore; napkin, serviette; towel
فوعة fau‘a: الشباب فوعة fau‘at aš-šbāb prime of youth
فوف fūf pellicle, membrane
فوفة fūfa pellicle, membrane
مفوف mufawwaf: مفوف ثوب (taub) white- striped garment
فوق) فاق) fāqa u (fauq, فواق fawāq) to surpass, excel, overtop (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), tower (ھ، هabove); to be superior (ه to s.o.); to outweigh, outbalance; to transcend, exceed (ھ s.th.); -- to remember (على s.th.)
│ فووق) بنفسه فاق fuwūq, فواق fuwāq) to give up the ghost, expire, die II to direct, level ( ه الى a weapon at), aim (ھ الى s.th. at); 732
to (a)waken, wake up, revive, restore to consciousness (ه s.o.); to clear, sober (ھ the head); to remind (ه s.o.) IV to recover, recuperate, convalesce (من from), regain health; to wake up, awake; to get up (من النوم min an-naum from sleep); to be awake; to come to, regain consciousness ( من after, e.g., after a swoon, after a state of intoxication); to awaken, arouse, stir up (
ه من s.o. from) V to be superior (على to), surpass, excel, overtop (على s.o., s.th.). tower (على above); to do excellent work, show outstanding skill (ب in, with); to pass an examination with distinction (ل in a course) X to recover, recuperate, convalesce (من from), regain health; to wake up, awaken; to get up (النوم من min an-naum from sleep); to be awake; to come to, regain consciousness (من after, e.g., after a swoon, after a state of intoxication)
فوق fauqu (adv.) up, upstairs, on top, above; fauqa (prep.) above, over; on, on top of; beyond, more than │ الحد فوق f. al- ḥadd boundless, unlimited, infinite, excessive, exaggerated; ذلك فوق moreover, besides, furthermore, in addition to that, beyond that; البنفسجي فوق (banafsajī) ultraviolet; الطبيعة فوق supernatural; فوق العادة extraordinary, unusual, exceptional; special, emergency (e.g., meeting); انه فوق in addition to the fact that it ..., beyond its being ...; فوقه فما and upward, and more (than that); فوقه من min fauqihī above it; from above it, from atop it
فوقاني fauqānī located higher or above, higher, upper
فاقة fāqa poverty, want, neediness, indigence
فواق fuwāq hiccup(s); gasping of a dying person, death rattle
افاويق afāwīq  (pl. of فيقة fīqa) milk (gathering in the udder between two milkings); (fig.) boons, kindness, benefactions │ بره افاويق ارضعني arḍa‘anī
a. birrihī he showered me with kindnesses
افاقة ifāqa recovery, recuperation, convalescence; awakening; revival, restoration to consciousness
 تفوق tafawwuq superiority; preponderance, predominance, ascendancy, supremacy; above-average performance, talent │ التفوق تشجيع promotion of young talent
فائق fā’iq superior; surpassing, excellent, exquisite, first-rate; outstanding, remarkable, striking; pre-eminent; exceeding, extraordinary; going far beyond (a restriction, etc.); awake, waking, wakeful
مفيق mafīq awake, waking, wakeful
متفوق mutafawwiq superior; surpassing, excellent, exquisite, first-rate, outstanding, remarkable, striking; pre-eminent; victor
مستفيق mustafīq awake, waking, wakeful
فول fūl (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. -āt bean(s); broad bean(s), horse bean(s) │ مدمس فول (eg., mədammis) cooked broad beans with oil (national dish in Egypt); سوداني فول (sūdānī) peanut(s)
فوال fawwāl seller of beans
فوالذ fūlād steel
فوالذي fūlādī and فالذي fulādī steel (adj.), of steel, made of steel; steely, steel-like, steel-hard
فولت volt volt (el.)
tūm ثوم = fūm فوم
فونوغراف funūgrāf pl. -āt phonograph
فوه) فاه) fāha u (fauh) to pronounce, utter, voice, say (ب s.th.) V = I
afwāh, افواه -- fam; فم of pl. afwāh افواه
افاويه afāwīh aromatic, spices 733
فوة fuwa (eg.) madder (Rubia tinctorum L.; bot.)
فوھة fūha pl. -āt, افواه afwāh, فوائه fawā’ih  mouth; opening, aperture, orifice, hole, vent; muzzle; crater; abyss, gulf, chasm; hydrant (syr.)
افوه afwah  broad-mouthed
مفوه mufawwah eloquent
في fī (prep.) in; at; on; near, by; within, during; among, in the company of, with; about, on; concerning, regarding, with reference to, with regard or respect to, as to j
dealing with, treating of, consisting in (in book titles); for the sake of, on behalf of, because of, for; according to; in proportion to; (as to syntactical regimen see under the respective verb) │ في لك ھل
... do you feel like ...? would you like
to ...? do you want to ...? ثالثة في خمسة five times three; عشرة في امتار خمسة five meters by ten (width and length); كذب في كذب (kidb) lie after lie; كالم في كالم (kalām) just so many words, idle talk; اقارب في اقارب نحن our social relations are those of kinsfolk; مضى فيما fīmā maḍā or الزمان من مضى فيما (zamān) in the past; formerly, before; فيما يلي (yalī) and بعد فيما (ba‘du) in the following, in what follows, below; اعتقد فيما (a‘taqidu) as I believe; بينھم فيما among themselves, among them; خبث في تبسم tabassama fī kubt he smiled maliciously
فيما fīmā (conj.) while; in that, as │ فيما اذا in case that …, if
 فيأ) فاء) fā’a i (فيء fai’) to return; to shift from west to east (shadow) II to afford shadow, be shady (tree) IV to give as booty (على ھ to s.o. s.th.); to give, afford, grant, award ( على ھ to s.o. s.th.), bestow (على ھ upon
s.o. s.th.) V to shade o.s. (في or ھ with s.th.), seek shade (في or ھ under s.th.)
fuyū’ فيوء afyā’, افياء pl. fai’ فيء
(afternoon) shadow
فئ see فئة 
فيتامين fītāmīn pl. -āt vitamin
فيتنام viyetnām Vietnam
فيتو vītō, vētō veto (pol.) │  الفيتو حق ḥaqq al-v.
veto power (pol.)
فيتون faitūn phaeton (light four-wheeled carriage)
افيح afyaḥ , f. فيحاء faiḥā’  fragrant, redolent, aromatic, sweet-smelling; wide, vast, extensive; الفيحاء epithet of Damascus
فياح fayyāḥ heavy-scented, strong- smelling
(فيد) IV to benefit, help, avail (ه s.o.), be of use, of help, bring advantages (ه to s.o.), be useful, helpful, beneficial, profitable, advantageous (ه for s.o.); to teach (ه ھ s.o. s.th.); to notify, advise (ب or ه ھ s.o. of), acquaint (ب or ه ھ s.o. with s.th.), inform ( ب or ه ھ s.o. of, about), let (ه s.o.) know (ب
 or ھ about); to report (ب or ھ s.th., also, e.g., to the police; بان or ان that); to acquire, gain, win (ھ s.th.); to derive benefit, profit, or advantage (من from), profit, benefit (من by), turn (من s.th.) to account or advantage; (gram.) to convey a complete, self-contained meaning X to acquire, gain, win (ھ s.th.); to learn, be told, be informed (ھ about); to derive benefit profit, or advantage (ب or من from), profit, benefit (ب or من by), turn (ب or من s.th.) to account or advantage; to utilize, turn to profitable use, use (ب or من s.th.), make use (ب or من of s.th.); to gather, conclude, deduce, infer (من from)
افيد afyad  more useful; more profitable
افادة ifāda utility, usefulness, benefit, advantage; (pl. -āt) notice, notification, communication, information, message; 734 testimony, deposition (in court) │ افادة االستالم acknowledgment of receipt
استفادة istifāda utilization, use
فائدة fā’ida pl. فوائد fawā’id  utility, avail, benefit, advantage; gain, profit; interest (on money); useful lesson, moral; use (e.g., of a medicine)
مفيد mufīd useful, beneficial, advantageous; favorable, profitable; instructive
مفاد mufād contents, substance, purport, meaning (e.g., of an article) │ مفادھا اشاعة ان išā‘atun mufāduhā an a rumor to the effect that ...
(daula) دولة فيدرالية │ federalistic fīdirālī فيدرالي state federal
فيروز fairūz and فيروزج fairūzaj turquoise
فيروز vairus pl. -āt virus ڤيزا ، فيزا (Engl.) vīzā visa فيزياء fīziyā’ physics
فيزيائي fīziyā’ī physical
فيسيولوجيا fīsiyōlōjiyā physiology
  فيش(Fr. fiche) fīš pl. -āt (electric) plug (syr.)
  فياش fayyāš braggart, show-off, self-inflated person
فصل see faiṣal فيصل
فيض) فاض) fāḍa i (faiḍ, فيضان fayaḍān) to overflow, flow over, run over; to inundate, flood, deluge (على s.th.); to flow, stream, pour forth, issue, emanate; to abound, super abound, be abundant, plentiful, superabundant; -- (faiḍ) to spread (of news); -- (faiḍ, فيوض fuyūḍ): روحه فاضت or نفسه (rūḥuhū, nafsuhū) to give up the ghost IV to pour forth; to fill (ھ s.th.) to overflowing; to pour, pour out, pour forth (ھ على s.th. over), shed (ھ s.th., esp. tears); to be prolix, long-winded, verbose ( في in one’s speech); to abandon o.s. without restraint (في to s.th.); to speak or report extensively, in detail, at great length (ب about), dwell (ب on), describe in detail (على ب to s.o. s.th.); to pronounce distinctly (ب a word) X to pour forth. spread (على over), flood (على s.th.); to spread (of news); to be superabundant, be too much; to be elaborate, complete in detail, exhaustive, thorough
فيض faiḍ flood, inundation, deluge; emanation; superabundance, plenty, copiousness, abundance; (pl. فيوض fuyūḍ) stream
فياض fayyāḍ overflowing, effusive, exuberant; elaborate, exhaustive (speech); munificent, bountiful, liberal, generous │ الخاطر فياض brilliant, overflowing with ideas
فيضان fayaḍān flood, inundation, deluge
│ النبل فيضان the annual inundation of the Nile
مفيض mafīḍ outlet, vent, drain; escape, way out │ مفيض منه لنا ليس we cannot help doing it, we cannot but do it; من مفيضا يجد ال (yajidu) he must by all means ...; يجد ال الكالم الى مفيضا he can’t find an opportunity to speak freely
افاضة ifāḍa elaborateness, detailedness, exhaustiveness
استفاضة istifāḍa (super)abundance, plenty; profusion
فائض fā’iḍ abundant, copious, plentiful, profuse, superabundant; surplus; (pl. فوائض fawā’iḍ ) interest (on money)
مستفيض mustafīḍ elaborate, detailed, extensive, exhaustive, thorough
 □ فائض >) فايظ see above) fāyiẓ usury (eg.)
فايظجي fāyiẓgī usurer (eg.)
فيفاء faifā’  pl. فياف fayāfin desert
فيكونت (Fr. vicomte) vikōnt and (Engl.)
vaikaunt viscount 735
 فيل) فال) fāla i (فيولة fuyūla, فيلولة failūla) to be erroneous (view)
afyāl افيال fuyūl, فيول fiyala, فيلة pl. fīl فيل 
elephant; bishop (chess) │ الفيل سن sinn al-
f. ivory
فيال villā pl. فيالت villa, country house الفيالريا ديدان dīdān al-fīlāriyā filaria (zool.) الفيلبين al-fīlibīn the Philippines
فيلج failaj, فيلجة failaja pl. فيالج fayālij  cocoon of the silkworm
فيلسوف failasūf pl. فالسفة falāsifa philosopher
فيلق failaq pl. فيالق fayāliq  large military unit; army corps; corps
film film فيلم = فلم
فيلولوجيا fīlōlōjiyā philology
فيم fīma = فيما fī-mā why? wherefore?
في see fīmā فيما
instant, time, of point time, -āt pl. faina فينة الفينة (al-fainata), الفينة بعد الفينة │ moment بين الفينة l-ukrā, ba‘da al-fainata بعد األخرى time, to time from والفينة ، في الفينة بعد الفينة times, at while, a in once then, and now sometimes
فينان fainān having beautiful, luxuriant hair; luxuriant, long, flowing (hair)
فيينا فينا، (It. Vienna) fiyennā, viyēnnā Vienna
فينوس fīnūs Venus
فينيسيا fīnīsiyā Venice
فينيقي fīnīqī Phoenician; (pl. -ūn) a Phoenician
فھيق II tafaihaqa to be prolix, long- winded, circumstantial
فيھقة faihaqa prolixity, long-windedness
الفيوم al-fayyūm El Faiyūm (town in N Egypt)
ق
ق abbreviation of دقيقة daqīqa minute
قادس qādis  Cádiz (seaport in SW Spain)
قادوس qādūs pl. قواديس qawādīs  water-wheel bucket, scoop (used in irrigation; Eg.)
قازوزة (It. gasosa) gāzūza soda water (saud.- ar.)
قاشاني qāšānī faïence; porcelain, china
قاف qāf name of the letter القاف جبل │ ق jabal al-q. in Islamic cosmology, name of the mountains surrounding the terrestrial world
 قاقلة qāqulla cardamom (bot.)
 قاقلى qāqullā a variety of saltwort (Salsola fruticos; bot.)
قاقم qāqum ermine
قالب qālab, qālib pl. قوالب qawālib  form; mold; cake pan; model; matrix; last, boot tree, shoe tree │ جبن قالب (jubn) a (chunk or loaf of) cheese; سكر قالب (sukkar) sugar loaf; صابون قالب (ṣābūn) a cake or bar of soap; وقالبا قلبا (qalban) with heart and soul; inwardly and outwardly
قالوش (Fr. galoche) galōš pl. -āt galosh, overshoe
قاموس qāmūs pl. قواميس qawāmīs  ocean; dictionary, lexicon
قان احمر aḥmar  qān(in) blood-red, deep-red قانئ qāni‘ blood-red, deep-red (=قان qānin) قانون qānūn pl. قوانين qawānīn  canon;
established principle, basic rule, axiom, norm, regulation, rule, ordinance, prescript, precept, statute; law; code; tax, impost; (Tun.) tax on olives and dates; a stringed musical instrument resembling the zither, with a shallow, trapezoidal sound box, set horizontally before the performer │ األساسي القانون (asāsī) basic constitutional law; statutes; التأسيس قانون statutes, constitution; الجنائي القانون (jinā’ī) criminal law; penal law; األحوال قانون الشخصية (šakšīya) personal statute; القانون الدستوري (dustūrī) constitutional law; القانون
 قانون law; international (duwalī) الدولي procedure of code al-murāfa‘āt q. المرافعات قانون اصول المحاكمات الحقوقية Eg.); (jur.; al-idārī as-silk قانون السلك اإلداري (Syr.); (kīmāwī) قانون كيماوي law; administrative (madanī) القانون المدني formula; chemical law civil
قانوني qanūnī canonical; legal, statutory; lawful, legitimate, licit, accordant with law or regulations, valid, regular; legist, jurisprudent, jurist │ قانوني صيدلي (ṣaidalī) certified and licensed pharmacist; غير قانوني gair q. illegal
قانونية qānūnīya legality, lawfulness
قاورمة qāwirma (eg.) mutton or beef cut in small pieces and braised with squash (qar‘) or onions and tomatoes
قاوق qāwuq and قاووق qāwūq pl. قواويق qawāwīq  a kind of high headgear made of felt
قاوون qāwūn melon
قايش qāyiš pl. قوايش qawāyiš leather thong, strap, belt, girth; strop
 قب qabba u (qabb) to chopoff, cut off (ھ s.th., e.g., the hand); to straighten up, draw o.s. up, become erect; to rise, ascend; to stand on end, bristle (hair)
قب qabb pl. اقب aqubb hub, nave (of a wheel); lever, beam (of a balance)
قبة qubba pl. قباب qibāb, قبب qubab cupola, dome; cupolaed structure, dome- shaped edifice; domed shrine, memorial shrine, kubba (esp., of a saint) │ الجرس قبة
q. al-jaras belfry, bell tower; اإلسالم قبة q. al-islām epithet of the city of Basra
مقبب muqabbab cupolaed, domed, spanned by a cupola or dome; convex
  قبqabba pl. -āt collar (of a garment)
قبج qabj, qabaj (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. قباج qibāj a kind of partridge
قبح qabuḥa u (qubḥ, qabḥ, قباحة qabāḥa) to be ugly, repulsive, repugnant, disgusting (physically or morally); to be ignominious, infamous, shameful, disgraceful, foul, vile, base, mean II to make ugly, repulsive, or repugnant, disfigure (ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to denounce s.o.’s action (فعله عليه ‘a. fi‘lahū) as ugly,
ignominious, infamous, shameful, or disgraceful; to censure, rebuke (فعله عليه
s.o. for his action) X to find (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) ugly, repugnant, or repulsive, find ( ھ s.th.) ignominious, infamous, shameful, disgraceful, foul, vile, base, or mean; to disapprove (ھ of s.th.), dislike (ھ s.th.)
قبح qubḥ, qabḥ ugliness; ignominy, infamy, shamefulness │ له قبحا shame on him!
قبيح qabīḥ pl. قباح qibāḥ, قباحى qabāḥā, قبحى qabḥā ugly, repulsive, repugnant, disgusting (physically or morally); ignominious, infamous, shameful, disgraceful, foul, vile, base, mean; impudent, shameless, insolent, impertinent
قبيحة qabīḥa pl. قبائح qabā’iḥ , قباح qibāḥ abomination, shameful deed, dirty trick, low act
قباحة qabāḥa ugliness; ignominy, infamy, shamefulness 737
اقبح aqbaḥ  uglier; more infamous; fouler, viler
مقابح maqābiḥ  ugly traits, repulsive qualities
 قبار qubbār, qabbār capers (bot.)
 قبر qabara u i (qabr, مقبر maqbar) to bury, inter, entomb (ه ,ھ s.o., s.th.)
قبر qabr pl. قبور qubūr grave, tomb, spulcher
قبر maqbar pl. مقابر maqābir  tomb, burying place, burial ground; cemetery, graveyard
مقبرة maqbura, maqbara pl. مقابر maqābir  tomb, burying place, burial ground; cemetery, graveyard
مقبري maqburī, maqbarī caretaker of a cemetery; gravedigger
  قبر qubbar (coll.; n. un. ة) lark (zool.)
قبرص qubruṣ  and قبرس qubrus  Cyprus
قبرصي qubruṣī Cyprian, Cypriote (adj. and n.); القبارصة al-qabāriṣa the Cypriotes
قبس qabasa i (qabs) to derive, acquire, loan, borrow, adopt, take over (ھ من s.th. from) VIII to take, or seek to take, fire (من from, also من نارا); to acquire or seek to acquire
 knowledge (من from, also من علما); to learn (ھ s.th.); to loan, borrow, adopt, take over (من or عن ھ s.th. from)
قبس qabas firebrand; live coal
قبسة qabsa firebrand
قابوس qābūs nightmare
اقتباس iqtibās learning, acquisition (of knowledge); loaning, loan, borrowing (fig); adoption, taking over, acceptance, adaptation (of a literary text or passage); quotation, citation (of another’s literary work or ideas)
مقتبسات muqtabasāt loans, borrowings (fig.)
قبص qabaṣa i (qabṣ) to take up with finger and thumb (ھ s.th.), take a pinch (ھ of s.th.)
قبصة qabṣa, qubṣa as much as may be taken between the finger and the thumb, a pinch
قبض qabaḍa i (qabḍ) to seize, take, grab, grasp, grip, clasp, clutch (على or ب or ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), take hold, take possession (على or ب or ه ھ، of); to hold (ه ھ، ب على، s.o., s.th.); to apprehend, arrest (على s.o.); to receive, collect (ھ s.th., e.g., money); to contract, constringe (ھ s.th.); to constipate (البطن al-baṭna the bowels); to oppress, deject, dishearten, dispirit, depress (ه s.o.); pass. qubiḍa or روحه قبضت qubiḍat rūḥuhū to die │ ﷲ قبضه or روحه ﷲ قبض (rūḥahū) God made him die; عن يده قبض (yadahū) to keep o.s. from seizing s.o. or s.th.; to be ungenerous, be stingy toward; الصدر قبض النفس)) (ṣadr, nafs) to oppress, deject, dishearten, dispirit, depress II to contract, constringe (ھ s.th.); to give (ھ s.th.) into s.o.’s (ه) possession; to pay (ھ a price) │ النفس) الصدر قبض) (ṣadr, nafs) to oppress, deject, dishearten, dispirit, depress V to contract, become contracted; to shrink, shrivel; to be constipated (bowels) VII = V; to be received; to shut o.s. off (عن from, to), close one's mind (عن to); to be dejected, depressed, dispirited, ill at ease, also صدره انقبض (ṣadruhū)
قبض qabḍ gripping, grasping, seizing, seizure, holding; taking possession, appropriation; apprehension, arrest (على of s.o.); receiving, receipt (esp., of money);
contraction, constriction, constipation │ والدفع القبض (daf‘) revenues and expenditures; عليه القبض القى (alqā l-qabḍa) to arrest s.o.
قبضة qabḍa pl. qabaḍāt seizure; grip, hold, clasp, grasp; handful; (Eg.) a 738 linear measure of 12.5 cm; -- (pl. قباض qibāḍ) handle, haft, hilt │ اليد قبضة q. al- yad fist; قبضته في in s.o.’s possession, in s.o.’s hands, in s.o.’s power; يده قبضة في do.; قبضته في وقع to fall into s.o.’s hands
قبضة qubḍa pl. قبض qubaḍ handful
قباضة qibāḍa raising, collecting, levying (of funds, of taxes)
قبضاى qabaḍāy pl. -āt (syr., leb.)
strong-arm (esp. one serving as bodyguard for politicians and prominent personalities); tough, bully
مقابض pl. miqbaḍ maqbiḍ, مقبض
maqābḍ  handle, haft, hilt
مقبض miqbaḍ pl. مقابض maqābiḍ  handle, knob, grip (also, e.g., of a walking stick)
تقابض taqābuḍ (Isl. Law) a reciprocal taking possession (of a commodity and its monetary equivalent by buyer and seller respectively)
انقباض inqibāḍ contraction, shriveling, shrinking, shrinkage; constipation (of the bowels); oppression, anguish, anxiety, dejectedness, depression, low spirits, gloom, also الصدر انقباض inq. aṣ-ṣadr
قابض qābiḍ constipating, costive (med.); grievous, distressing, embarrassing; receiver, recipient; gripper, clamp, claw, catcher, tongs, holder (techn.); (pl. -ūn, قباض qubbāḍ) (tax) collector │ قابضة عضلة (‘aḍala) flexor; األمر على قابض (amr) ruler, potentate
مقبوض maqbūḍ: عليه مقبوض person under arrest; (pl. -āt, مقابيض maqābīḍ ) revenue (fin.)
منقبض mungabiḍ oppressed, worried, dispirited, disheartened, downcast, dejected, depressed, ill at ease │ منقبض النفس) الصدر) m. aṣ-ṣadr (or an-nafs) do.
 قبط II وجھه قبط (wajhahū) to knit the brows, frown, scowl, glower
  القبط al-qibṭ, al-qubṭ pl. األقباط al-aqbāṭ the Copts
قبطي qibṭī, qubṭī Coptic; Copt
 قبطان qubṭān pl. قباطين qabāṭīn , قباطنة qabāṭina captain (of a ship and, in Tun., as a military rank = Fr. capitaine)
قبع qaba‘a a (قبوع qubū‘) to retract the head (hedgehog); to crouch, squat, sit; -- (qab‘, قباع qibā‘, qubā‘) to grunt (hog); to trumpet (elephant); -- (qab‘) to drink in hasty gulps (eg.)
قبعة qubba‘a pl. -āt hat; cap; (syr.) small felt cap
مقبع muqabba‘ wearing a bat, hatted
قبقب qabqaba to swell, bulge
wooden qabāqīb  قباقيب pl. qabqāb قبقاب skate  قبقاب انزالق │ patten clog,
(mismār) مسمار قباقيبي qabāqībī: قباقيبي (eg.) tack blue nail, small
قبل qabila a (قبول qabūl, qubūl) to accept (ب or
ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to receive (kindly,
hospitably) (ه s.o.), give (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) a friendly reception, receive (ھ s.th.) favorably, approve (ه ھ، of s.o., of s.th.); to acquiesce (ھ in s.th.), put up (ھ with s.th.), agree, consent, assent (ھ to, also ب); to admit (ه ھ، في s.o., s.th. to); to obey (من s.o.), yield, give in (من to s.o.), submit to s.o.’s (من) command; -- qabila a and qabala u i (قبالة qabāla) to guarantee, vouch, be surety (ب for) │ معي الذھاب قبل (dahāba) he was willing to go with me; qabila with acc. of a maṣdar frequently corresponds to an English adjective in
-able, -ible, -ive, -al, e.g., الشفاء يقبل داء (šifā’a) a curable disease, االلتھاب تقبل بضائع (highly) combustible merchandise; ال اثمان المزاحمة تقبل (muzāḥamata) prices that are beyond competition; شكا قبل (šakkan) to admit doubt II to kiss (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); (eg.) to go 739 south(ward) III to b. or stand exactly opposite s.o. or s.th. (ه ھ،), be face to face (ه ھ، with); to confront, face, counter (ه s.o.; ب ھ s.th. with, e.g., a situation with caution); to meet (ه s.o.; ب ھ s.th., e.g., a danger, with, by); to encounter (ه s.o.), run across s.o. (ه); to visit (ه s.o.), call on s.o. (ه); to meet, get together, have a talk or interview (ه with
s.o.); to interview (ه s.o.); to receive (in audience) (ه s.o.), grant an audience (ه to s.o.); to receive (ھ ب، s.o., s.th. with, e.g., a news with joy); to repay, return, requite (ھ ب s.th. with); to compare, collate (على or ھ ب s.th. with) │ والساعة الرحب على قابله (raḥb, sā‘a) to welcome s.o. or s.th.; قابله بالمثل (bi-l-mitl) to return like for like IV to turn forward; to draw near, come close to
s.o. or to a place (على), approach (على s.o., a place); to advance (على to, toward); to turn (على to. toward); to embark, enter (على upon s.th.), engage (على in); to give one’s attention, devote o.s. (على to s.o., to s.th.), dedicate o.s., apply o.s., attend (على to s.th.), occupy o.s. (على with); to take an interest, become or be interested (على in); to go, come (الى to); to be abundant (crop); (with foll. imperf.) to begin to do │ اقبل الدھر عليه (dahru) or الدنيا عليه اقبل (dunya) luck is on his side, fortune smiles on him V to accept, receive (ھ s.th.); to hear, grant (دعاءه du‘ā’ahū s.o.’s prayer; of God) VI to be opposite each other, face each other; to meet (e.g., two persons); to get together, have a meeting; meet (مع with); to be compared, be collated VIII to receive (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to apply o.s. gladly and willingly (ھ to s.th.) X to turn one’s face (ه ھ، to s.o., toward s.th.); to go to meet, to meet (ه s.o.); to face, confront, meet (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to take upon o.s., assume (ھ s.th.); to receive (ه a visitor, a guest; ھ s.th., e.g., a radio broadcast)
قبل qablu (adv.) or قبل من min qablu and قبال qablan previously, formerly, earlier, before; قبل ذي من (qablu), قبل ذي عن (after a comparative) ... than before; qabla (prep.) before, prior to │ شيء كل قبل qabla kull šai’in first of all, above all; قبل من min qabli before, prior to; ان قبل (conj.) before
قبلئذ qabla’idin previously, formerly, once, in former times
قبيل qubaila (prep.) shortly before, prior to; ان قبيل (conj.) shortly before
قبل qubl, qubul fore part, front part, front, face │ قبل من (qubulin) in front; from the front, from in front
قبل qibal power, ability; -- qibala (prep.) in the presence of, before. near; in the direction of, toward │ له قبل ال (qibala)
 he has no power over it, it is not in his power; he is incapable of accomplishing it; قبل من min qibali on the part of, from, by; نفسه قبل من by himself (or itself), of his (or its) own accord; دين قبله لي lī qibalahū dain he owes me a debt, he is indebted to me
قبلة qubla pl. qublāt, qubulāt, قبل qubal
kiss
قبلة qibla kiblah, direction to which Muslims turn in praying (toward the Kaaba); recess in a mosque indicating the direction of the Kaaba, prayer niche │ اولى القبلتين ūlā l-qiblatain the first of the two kiblahs, i.e. Jerusalem; األنظار قبلة q. al- anẓār focus of attention, target of all eyes, ideal, goal sought after and aspired to; قبلة االھتمام object of widespread interest, focus of attention
الوجه القبلي │ south southern, qiblī قبلى
(wajh) Upper Egypt
قبول qabūl, qubūl (friendly) reception; welcome; acceptance; concurrence, consent, assent, approval, admission, admittance; with foll. maṣdar corresponding 740 to English abstract nouns in -ability, -ibility, -ivity, -ality, e.g., التفرقة قبول عدم ‘adam q. at-tafriqa indivisibility
قبيل qabīl guarantor, bail(sman), surety; kind, specimen, species, sort; tribe │ من القبيل ھذا of this kind, like this, such; in this respect; اإليضاح قبيل من (q. il-īḍāḥ by way of illustration, as an explanation; قبيل كل من ودبير (dabīr) of every origin (whatsoever); دبير وال قبيل في األمر ھذا من ليس he is not in the least involved in this affair, he has absolutely nothing to do with this affair
قبيلة qabīla pl. قبائل qabā’il  tribe
قبلي qabalī tribal
قبالة qabāla bail, guaranty, suretyship, liability, responsibility; contract, agreement
قبالة qibāla midwifery, obstetrics
قبالة qubālata (prep.) opposite, face to face with, vis-à-vis, in front of
تقبيل taqbīl kissing
قبال qibāla (prep.) opposite, face to face with, vis-à-vis, in front of
مقابلة muqābala encounter; meeting; conversation, talk, discussion; interview; audience; reception; comparison, collation
│ ذلك مقابلة muqābalata d. or ذلك مقابلة في  in return for that, in exchange for that, in compensation for that, as an equivalent for that, for that, therefor; المقابلة تشريح comparative anatomy; بالمثل المقابلة (bi-l- mitl) requital; retaliation, reprisal; أخذ بالمقابلة to  return like for like
اقبال iqbāl drawing near, advance, approach; coming, arrival, advent; turning, application, attention, response, responsiveness (على to), concern (على for), intereot (على in), demand; good fortune, prosperity, welfare │ وادبارا اقباال iqbālan wa-idbāran back and forth, to and fro, up end down
تقبل taqabbul receptivity, susceptibility, sensibility
اقتبال iqtibāl reception
استقبال istiqbāl pl. -āt reception; opposition (astron.); full moon (as an astronomical aspect); the future; استقباال istiqbālan in the future │ االستقبال آلة receiving set, receiver; االستقبال غرفة gurfat al-ist. reception room, parlor; استقباله في كان he was present to greet him, he had come to meet him, he received him
قابل qābil obstetrician, accoucheur; coming, next (e.g., month); subject, liable, susceptible, disposed (ل to s.th.); O receiver (radio); with foll. ل and maṣdar corresponding to English adjectives in
(li-l- قابل للموت e.g., -al, -ive, -ible, -able, قابل لاللتھاب curable; قابل للشفاء mortal; maut) قابل inflammable; combustible, (highly) غير قابل للرجوع (el.); conductive للتوصيل يكون جواز السفر قابال للتجديد اربع irrevocable; the marrātin) arba‘a as-safar, (jawāz مرات times four renewed be can passport
قابلة qābila pl. -āt, قوابل qawābil  midwife, accoucheuse; -- (pl. قوابل qawābil ) receptacle, container; -- pl. قوابل beginnings
قابلية qābilīya faculty, power, capacity, capability, ability; aptitude, fitness; tendency, disposition, liability,
 susceptibility, sensibility, receptivity (ل to); appetite │ للتوصيل قابلية conductivity (el.); القسمة قابلية q. al-qisma divisibility; cf. قابل
مقبول maqbūl acceptable, reasonable; satisfactory (as an examination grade; Eg.); pleasing, obliging, complaisant, amiable; well-liked, likable, popular, welcome
مقبالت muqabbilāt appetizers, hors d’oeuvres
مقابل muqābil facing, opposite; counter- (in compounds); equivalent, wages, 741 remuneration, recompense │ ذلك مقابل (muqābila) or ذلك مقابل في accordingly, in accordance with that, in return for that, in exchange for that, in compensation for that, as an equivalent for that, for that, therefor; الكوبون تقديم مقابل upon presentation of the coupon; العام في خمسين مقابل سفينة مائة السابق (mi’at safīna m. kamsīn 100 ships as compared with 50 the previous year; بدون مقابل or مقابل غير من without compensation, for nothing, gratis
مقبل muqbil coming, next (e.g., month, year)
m. fī في مقتبل العمر muqtabal: مقتبل مقتبل الليل life; of prime the in il-‘umr
(muqtabala l-lail) at the beginning of the night, early at night
مستقبل mustaqbil receiving set, receiver (radio)
مستقبل mustaqbal front part, front, face; future (adj.); the future
قبن II to weigh (with a steelyard) (ھ s.th.)
قبان qabbān steelyard; scale beam; platform scale, weighbridge
 قباء qabā’ pl. اقيةن aqbiya an outer garment with full-length sleeves
 قبو) قبا) qabā u to vault, arch, camber, curve, bend (ھ s.th.)
قبو qabw pl. اقبية aqbiya vault; vaulted roof; cellar; tunnel, gallery, drift, adit (mining); O prompt box │ O من الوقاية قبو الجوية الغارات (jawwīya) air-raid shelter
قبوة qabwa vault
قباء qibā’ interval, interspace, distance
قبودان qabūdān captain
قت qatta u (qatt) to render falsely, misrepresent, depreciate, belittle, minimize (ھ s.th.); to lie VIII to uproot, root out, extirpate (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.)
قتات qattāt slanderer, calumniator
قتب qatab pl. اقتاب aqtāb (eg.) hunch, hump
مقوتب muqautab hunchbacked
قتاد qatād tragacanth (Astragalus; bot.)
│ قتاد على he was sitting on a bed of thorns
قتر qatara u i (qatr, قتور qutūr) and II to be stingy, tightfisted, niggardly, parsimonious (على toward s.o.), keep (على s.o.) short, stint (على s.o.) IV do.; to live in straitened circumstances, be or become poor
قتر qatr stinginess, niggardliness, parsimony (على toward)
قترة qatara dust
قتار quṭār aroma, smell (of s.th. fried or cooked)
تقتير taqtīr stinginess, niggardliness, parsimony (على toward)
قاتر qātir stingy, tightfisted, miserly, niggardly, parsimonious (على toward)
مقتر muqattir, muqtir stingy, tightfisted, miserly, niggardly, parsimonious (على toward)
قتل qatala u (qatl) to kill, slay, murder, assassinate (ه s.o.); to mitigate, alleviate ( ھ s.th., e.g., البرد al-barda the cold, الجوع al-jū‘a the hunger); to mix, dilute (ھ ب s.th. with, e.g., wine with water); to know, master (ھ s.th., e.g., a skill) │ خبرا قتله علما)) (kubran, ‘ilman) or وبحثا درسا قتله (darsan wa-baḥtan) to know or master s.th. (e.g., a skill, a field of study) thoroughly; بحثا الموضوع قتل (baḥtan) to study a topic most thoroughly, treat a subject exhaustively; خبرة الدھر قتل (dahra kibratan) to have long experience with life, be worldly wise II to kill, massacre ( ھم people), cause carnage (ھم among people) III to combat, battle (ه s.o.), fight ( ه s.o., with s.o., or against s.o.) │ ﷲ قاتله lit.: may God fight him! i.e., 742 approx.: damned bastard! VI and VIII to fight with
 one another, combat each other X to risk one’s life, defy death
قتل qatl killing; manslaughter, homicide; murder, assassination │ بسبب قتل (bi-sababin) indirect killing (Isl. Law); قتل الخطأ q. al-kaṭa’ accidental homicide (jur.); العمد القتل (‘amd) or العمدي القتل (‘amdī) or عمدا القتل (‘amdan) or سبق مع العمد القتل اإلصرار (sabqi l-iṣrār) premeditated murder
قتل qitl pl. اقتال aqtāl enemy, foe, adversary, opponent
قتيل qatīl pl. قتلى qatlā killed; killed in battle, fallen; one killed in battle, casualty
│ الحرب قتيل q. al-ḥarb man killed in war
قتال qattāl murderous, deadly, lethal
اقتل aqtal  deadlier, more lethal in effect
مقتل maqtal murder, death; murderous battle; (pl. مقاتل maqātil ) vital part of the body (the injury of which will bring about death), mortal spot, mortal organ; Achilles’ heel, vulnerable spot │ في ضربه مقاتله (ḍarabahū) or المقتل منه اصاب (aṣāba) he hit him at his most vulnerable spot
مقتلة maqtala pl. -āt butchery, slaughter, carnage, massacre
تقتيل butchery, slaughter, carnage, massacre
قتال qitāl fight, struggle, contention (against); combat, strife, battle │ القتال ساحة battlefield
مقاتلة muqātala fight, struggle, contention (against); combat, strife
تقاتل taqātul mutual struggle
قاتل qātil killing, murdering; deadly, lethal, mortal, fatal; (pl. قتال quttāl, قتلة qatala) killer, manslayer; murderer, assassin
قاتالت qātilāt lethal agents (ل against)
مقتل muqattal experienced, practiced, tried, tested
مقاتل muqatil fighter, combatant, warrior; fighting, combat-, battle- (in compounds)
مقاتلة muqatila (coli.) combatants, warriors, fighting forces
مقاتلة muqātila pl. -āt combat plane, light bomber
مقتتل muqtatal battlefield, battleground
مستقتل mustaqtil death-defying, heroic
قتم qatama u (قتوم qutūm) to rise (dust) IX to be dark(-colored), blackish
قتمة qutma, qatama dark or blackish color, darkness, gloom
قتام qatām dark or blackish color, darkness, gloom
اقتم aqtam  dark-colored, blackish, dark
قاتم qātim pl. قواتم qawātim  black, dark
pitch-black اسود قاتم │
 قث qatta u (qatt) and VIII to pull out, tear out, uproot (ھ s.th.)
  قثاء qittā’, quttā’ (coll.; n. un. ة) cucumber
قثاطير qatāṭīr  catheter O قثطرة qatṭara catheter  قح qaḥḥa to cough
 قح quḥḥ pl. اقحاح aqḥāḥ pure, sheer, unmixed, unadulterated; genuine
قحبة qaḥba pl. قحاب qiḥāb whore, harlot, prostitute
قحط qaḥaṭa a (qaḥṭ, قحوط quḥūṭ) and qaḥiṭa a (qaḥaṭ) to be withheld, fail to set in (rains); active and pass. quḥiṭa to be rainless (year) II to pollinate (النخلة an- naklata the palm tree); (eg.) to scratch 743 off, scrape off (ھ s.th.) IV to be rainless (year)
قحط qaḥṭ want of rain, rainleseness; drought, dryness; famine; dearth, lack, want, scarcity
قحطان qaṭān  legendary ancestor of the South Arabians
قحف qaḥafa a (qaḥf) to swallow, gulp down (ھ s.th.); to sweep away, carry away (ھ s.th.; of a river) VIII = I
aqḥāf, اقحاف quḥūf, قحوف pl. qiḥf قحف
قحفة qiḥafa skull; cranium, brainpan
قحاف quḥāf torrential (river)
قحل qaḥila a (qaḥal) and pass. quḥila to be or become dry or arid, dry up, wither
قحل qaḥal dryness aridity
 قحل qaḥil dry, arid
قحولة quḥūla dryness, aridity
قحالء qaḥlā’ f. dry
قاحل qāḥil dry, arid
قحم IV to push, drag (ه في s.o. into s.th.), involve (ه في s.o. in); to introduce forcibly, cram (ه في s.th. into) │ بينھم نفسه اقحم (nafsahū) he squeezed himself between them VIII to plunge, rush, hurtle (ھ into s.th.); to break (ھ into s.th.), intrude, invade (ھ s.th.); to burst (ھ into a room); to jump, leap, dive (ھ into s.th.); to rush, dart (ھ at); to storm, take by storm (ھ s.th.); to embark boldly (ھ upon s.th.); to defy (ھ danger, hardships, etc.)
قحمة kuḥma pl. قحم quḥam danger one rushes into. hazardous undertaking
مقحام miqḥām pl. مقاحيم maqāḥīm  one who plunges heedlessly into danger, reckless, daring, foolhardy
اقحام iqḥām dragging in, implicating, involvement
اقتحام iqtiḥām brooking in, inrush, irruption, intrusion, obtrusion; inroad, invasion, incursion; storming, capture by storm
aqāḥīy اقاحي aqāḥin, اقاح pl. uqḥuwān اقحوان
camomile (bot.); daisy (bot.)
 قد qad (particle) with foll. perf. indicates the termination of an action; sometimes corresponding to English “already”; with foll. imperf.: sometimes, at times; perhaps, or English “may”, “might”
  قدqadda u (qadd) to cut lengthwise, cut into strips (ھ s.th.); to cut off (ھ s.th.); to chop off (ھ s.th.); to cut out, carve out (ھ s.th.)
│ حجر من قلبه قد qudda qalbuhū min ḥajarin to have a heart of stone II = I; to cut into strips and dry (ھ s.th., e.g., meat, fruits), to jerk (ھ meat) VII to split, burst (also, e.g., with laughter) VIII = I
قد qidd pl. اقد aqudd strip (of leather), strap, thong
قدة qidda pl. قدد qidad rail; ruler │ طرائق قددا tafarraqū ṭarā’iqa qidadan to split into many parts or groups, break up, dissolve
قديد qadīd meat cut into strips and dried, jerked meat
قد qadd pl. قدود qudūd shape, build, frame, physique, stature, height, figure;
(eg.) size, bulk, volume, quantity │ على قده of the same size, of equal size, just as (large)
قدح qadaḥa a (qadḥ) to bore, pierce (في s.th.); to slander, defame, malign, vilify (في s.o.); to rebuke, censure, blame (في s.o.); to reprove, reproach, chide (في s.o.); to reject as objectionable (في a witness, a testimony); to impair, depreciate, belittle, lessen, diminish, degrade (ب or في s.th.), detract (ب or في from); to violate, infringe (في s.th.), offend (٤٤٧ في against); to strike fire (with a flint) (also with النار an-nāra)
│ الفكر زناد قدح (z. al-fikr) to ponder, think hard, rack one’s brain; فكره قدح (fikrahū) to think hard; شررا قدح (šararan) to strike or emit sparks VIII to strike fire (with a flint), also النار اقتدح; to weigh, consider (ھ s.th.)
قدح qadḥ slander, calumniation, calumny, defamation, vilification, aspersion; censure, rebuke, reproof, reproach; depreciation, detraction (ب of في from), impairment
قدح qidḥ, pl. قداح qidāḥ, اقدح aqduḥ, اقداح aqdāḥ, اقاديح aqādīḥ  arrow shaft; arrow; divining arrow, arrow used for oracles │ المعلى القدح (mu‘allā) the seventh of the divining arrows used in the ancient Arabian game of maisir, i.e., the best of them which won seven shares of the slaughtered camel, hence: في المعلى القدح له to be the principal agent in, have a major impact on, exert decisive influence on, be of crucial importance for
قدح qadaḥ pl. اقداح aqdāḥ drinking bowl; (drinking) cup; goblet; glass, tumbler; tea glass; keddah, a dry measure (Eg. = 1/96 اردب ardabb = 2.0621)
قداح qaddāḥ and قداحة qaddāḥa pl. -āt flint; fire steel, fire iron (for striking sparks from flint); flint and steel; lighter (e.g., for cigarettes)
مقدحة miqdaḥa fire steel, fire iron (for striking sparks from flint)
 قدر qadara u i (qadr) to decree, ordain, decide (ھ s.th.; of God) -- qadara i (قدرة qudra, مقدرة maqdura, maqdara, maqdira) and qadira a (qadar) to possess strength, power, or ability; to have power (على over s.th.), be master (على of s.th.), be equal ( على to s.th.), be up to s.th. (على); to have the possibility to do (على s.th.), be in a position to do s.th. (ان or على), be able to do s.th. (ان or على), be capable (ان or على of) II to appoint, assign, determine, ordain, decree (ھ s.th., على for s.o.; of God); to predetermine, foreordain, (pre)destine (ھ ھ s.th.; of God); to appraise (ھ s.th.; with respect to its worth and amount), assess, estimate, calculate, tax, evaluate, value, rate (ھ ب s.th. at); to anticipate, foresee (ھ s.th.); to surmise, guess, presume, suppose, believe, think, be of the opinion (ان that); to esteem highly, value, treasure, prize, cherish (ه s.o., ھ s.th., ل ھ s.th. in s.o., because of s.th. s.o.); to appreciate (ھ s.th.); to enable (ه على s.o. to do s.th.), put (ه s.o.) in a position (على to do s.th.); (gram.) to imply in an expression (ل or ھ) another (ب or ھ) as virtually existing │ ﷲ قدر ال (which) God forbid! فكان قدر (quddira) the inevitable happened! قدره حق قدره (ḥaqqa qadrihi) to attach the proper value to s.o. or s.th., fully appreciate the value of s.o. or s.th.; يقدر ال lā yuqaddaru inestimable, invaluable, immeasurable, immense, huge, enormous, tremendous IV to enable (ه على
s.o. to do s.th.), put (ه s.o.) in a position ( على to do s.th.) V to he appointed, assigned, determined, ordained, destined, fated, decreed VIII = I qadara i X to ask (ه God) for strength or ability
قدر qadr pl. اقدار aqdār extent, scope, quantity, amount, scale, rate, measure, number; sum, amount; degree, grade; worth, value, standing, rank; divine decree
│ القدر ليلة lailat al-q. the night in which, according to sura 97, the Koran was revealed, celebrated during the night between the 26  and 27  of Ramadan; قدر من a certain extent of, a certain degree of; قدر qadra, بقدر bi-qadri, قدر على commensurate with, corresponding to, according to, in proportion to; ما بقدر bi- qadri mā in the same measure 745 as, to the same extent as, as much as, as large
certain a to mā qadrin ‘alā على قدر ما as; l- qadra قدر المستطاع relatively; extent, بقدر المستطاع, على قدر المستطاع، قدر mustaṭā‘, l-imkān, qadra قدر اإلمكان ṭ-ṭ., qadra الطاقة as far as على قدر اإلمكان and بقدر اإلمكان best the in possible, as much as possible, abilities; one’s of best the to possible, way qadruha aglabīya اغلبية قدرھا مائة صوت hundred a of majority a ṣautin mi’atu of people q. dawū ذوو قدرة votes; people important distinction,
قدر qadar pl. اقدار aqdār divine fore- ordainment, predestination; fate, destiny, lot │ القدر مذھب madhab al-q. fatalism; والقدر القضاء (qaḍā’) fate and divine decree; وقدرا قضاء qaḍā’an wa-qadaran or بالقضاء والقدر by fate and divine decree; على جاء قدر he arrived just at the right time
القدرية al-qadarīya a theological school of early Islam asserting man’s free will
قدر qidr m. and f., pl. قدور qudūr
cooking pot, kettle, pot
قدرة qidra cooking pot, kettle, pot
قدرة qadara small bottle, flask
قدرة qudra faculty (على of), power, strength (على for), potency; capacity, ability, capability, aptitude; omnipotence (of God) │ O العمل على القدر (‘amal) power, capacity (techn., phys.); O االنتقاء على القدر selectivity (radio)
قدير qadīr possessing power or strength, powerful, potent; having mastery (على over s.th.), capable (على of s.th.); omnipotent, almighty, all-powerful (God)
اقدر aqdar  mightier, more powerful; more capable (على of), abler (على to do s.th.)
مقدرة maqdura, maqdara, maqdira faculty (على of), power, strength (على for), potency; capacity, ability, capability, aptitude │ O الحربية المقدرة (ḥarbīya) military resources, military potential
مقدار miqdār pl. مقادير maqādīr  measure; extent in space and time; scope, extent, scale, rate, range; quantity; amount
│ ادنى مقدار (adnā) a minimum; اقصى مقدار (aqṣā) a maximum; ما بمقدار bi-miqdāri mā to the same extent or degree as …; as much as ...; المقدار بھذا to such an extent or
 degree, so much; بمقدار to a certain extent or degree, somewhat, a little
تقدير taqdīr pl. -āt, تقادير taqādīr  estimation, appraisal, assessment, taxation, rating; calculation, estimate, valuation; appreciation; esteem; assumption, surmise, supposition, proposition; implication of a missing syntactical part (gram.); (pl. -āt) grading, evaluation (of achievement; school, university); تقديرا taqdīran by implication, implicitly, virtually │ لھذا تقديرا in appreciation of this; تقدير اقل على ‘alā aqalli t. at least; التقدير اكثر على at most; عن تقديري مبلغ ‘an mablagi taqdīrī as far as I can judge for myself
اقتدار iqtidār might, power, strength, potency; ability, capability, faculty, capacity, efficiency, aptitude
قادر qādir possessing power or strength, powerful, potent; having mastery ( علىvover s.th.), being equal (قدر to s.th.); capable (على of s.th.), able (على to do s.th.); efficient, capable, talented
مقدور maqdūr decreed (على against, by fate); (pl. مقادير maqādīr ) destiny, fate; (pl. -āt) faculty, capability, ability; potential, resources │ ان مقدوره في to be able to …, be capable of ..., be in a position to ..., have the possibility to ...
مقدر muqaddir estimator, appraiser, assessor, taxer
مقدر muqaddar decreed, foreordained, predestined; implied, implicit, virtual; مقدرات fates, destinies; estimates, preliminary calculations 746
مقتدر muqtadir possessing power or strength, powerful, potent; having mastery (على over s.th.), being equal (على to s.th.); able (على to do s.th.), capable (على of); efficient capable, talented
 قدس qadusa u (quds, qudus) to be holy, be pure II to hallow, sanctify (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to dedicate. consecrate (ھ s.th.); to declare to be holy, glorify (ﷲ God); to hold sacred, venerate, revere, reverence, worship (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); (Chr.) to canonize (ه s.o.); (Chr.) to say Mass, celebrate │ سره ﷲ قدس (sirrahū) may God sanctify his secret! (eulogy used when
mentioning the name of a deceased Muslim saint) V to be hallowed, be sacred or sanctified
قدس quds, qudus holiness, sacredness, sanctity; (pl. اقداس aqdas) sanctuary, shrine; القدس al-quds Jerusalem │ قدس األقداس the holy of holies (Chr., Jud.); روح القدس الروح القدس، (ar-)rūḥ al-qudus the Holy Ghost (Chr.)
قدسي qudsī holy, sacred; saintly; saint
قدسية qudsīya holiness, sacredness, sanctity; saintliness
قداس quddās pl. -āt, قداديس qadādīs 
Mass (Chr.)
قداسة qadāsa holiness, sacredness, sanctity; saintliness │ البابا قداسة His Holiness the Pope
قدوس qaddūs, quddūs most holy; القدوس
the Most Holy, the All-Holy (God)
قديس qiddīs pl. -ūn holy, saintly; Christian saint │ القديسين كل عيد ‘īd kull al-
q. All Saints’ Day (Chr.)
اقدس aqdas  more hallowed, more sacred, holier
المقدس بيت bait al-maqdis Jerusalem
تقديس taqdīs sanctification, hallowing; dedication, consecration; celebration (Chr.); Consecration (as part of the Roman Catholic Mass; Chr.); reverence, veneration, worship
مقدس muqaddis reverent, reverential, venerative
مقدس muqaddas hallowed. sanctified, dedicated, consecrated; holy, sacred; pl.
-āt sacred things, sacrosanct things │ المقدسة (البالد) األرض (arḍ) the Holy Land, Palestine; المقدس البيت (bait) Jerusalem; البيت مقدس ال the Holy Scriptures, the Holy Bible (Chr.)
متقدس mutaqaddis hallowed, sanctified, dedicated, consecrated; holy, sacred
 قادس qādis Cādiz (seaport in SW Spain)
 قادوس pl. قواديس look up alphabetically
قدم qadama u (qadm, قدوم qadūm) to precede (ه s.o.); -- qadima a (قدوم qudūm, قدمان qidmān, مقدم maqdam) to arrive (ھ at
 a place); to come; to get (الى or على or ه to s.o.; ھ to a place). reach (الى or ه على، s.o.; ھ a place); to have the audacity to do s.th. (على); -- qaduma u (qidam) to be old, be ancient II to make or let (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) precede, go before, or lead the way; to send forward, send ahead, send off, dispatch, send on in advance (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to set forth beforehand, premise (ل ھ s.th. as introductory to s.th., e.g., a preface to a book); to place (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) at the head; to set forward, set ahead (ھ a clock); to do earlier, do beforehand, do before s.th. else (ھ s.th.); to give precedence (ه ھ، على to s.o., to s.th. before), give priority (ھ على to s.th. over); to prefer (ه ھ، على s.o., s.th. to s.o. or s.th. else), give preference (ه ھ، على to s.o., to s.th. over); (Tun.) to appoint as legal guardian (ه على s.o. for); to prepare, ready, keep ready, provide, set aside, earmark (ل ه s.th. for); to provide, 747 make provisions (ل for); to offer, proffer, tender, extend, present, produce, exhibit, display ( ھ s.th., الى or ل to s.o.); to hand over, deliver (ھ s.th., الى or ل to s.o.); to submit, refer (o s.th., الى or ل to s.o.), lay s.th. (ھ) before s.o. (الى or ل); to give u a present (ھ s.th., الى or ل to s.o.), offer up, present (الى or ه ھ، ل s.o., s.th. to s.o., to s.th.); to dedicate (الى or ھ ل s.th., e.g., a book, to s.o.); to file, turn in (ھ s.th., e.g., a report), send in, submit (ھ s.th., e.g., an application, الى or ل to), lodge (ھ e.g., a complaint, الى or ل before); to give (o an answer); to take (o an examination); to bring s.o. (ه) before a proper authority, esp., before a tribunal (امام or الى), arraign s.o.; to introduce, present (ل or ه الى s.o. to
s.o. else), make (ه s.o.) acquainted (ل or الى with s.o. else); (intr.) to precede; to be fast (clock) │ يديه بين قدمه (baina yadaihi) to send s.th. ahead of s.th. else, let s.th. precede s.th. else; الثمن له قدم (tamana) to pay the price to s.o. in advance, advance the price to s.o.; خدمة قدم (kidmatan) to render a service; خطوة قدم (kidmatan) to make a step forward; له الشكر قدم (šukra) to extend one’s thanks to s.o., thank s.o.; قدم البوليس الى نفسه to give o.s. up to the police; اخرت وما قدمت ما (akkartu) what I have ever committed; يداك قدمت ما (yadāka) what you have committed or perpetrated; رجال يقدم
أخرى ويؤخر yuqaddimu rijlan wa-yu’akkiru ukrā to hesitate, waver, be undecided; فرق تؤخر وال تقدم ال شھور farqu šuhūrin lā tuqaddimu wa-lā tu’akkiru a difference of a few months which is of no consequence IV to be bold, audacious, daring; to make bold, have the audacity to do s.th. (على); to venture, risk, undertake, tackle (على s.th.), set about s.th. (على); to brave (على s.th.), embark boldly (على upon), dare to engage (على in), venture upon s.th. (على); to attack (على s.o., s.th.) V to precede (عن or على or ه ھ، s.o., s.th., in space and time), go before s.o. or s.th. (ه ھ، على، عن،); to head (على or ھم a group of people), be at the head (على or ھم of a group of people); to belong to an earlier, older time; to go forward, move (for, ward), proceed (نحو toward), advance march (نحو against, toward); to progress, make progress; to come on, come closer, move nearer (الى to); to approach (الى s.o. or s.th.), accost ( الى s.o.); to step up (الى to); to present o.s. (
يديه بين or الى to), step before (يديه بين or الى); o to meet, face (ل or الى an opposing team, in sports); to turn, apply (ل ب or الى to s.o. with a request); to submit (ل or الى to s.o. ب s.th., e.g., a request); to order, direct, commission (الى ب s.o. to do, to bring, etc., s.th.) │ به تقدم to further, advance, promote, improve s.th.; السن به تقدمت (sinnu) to get older, be advanced in years; تقدم كما already mentioned; تأخر وما ذنبه من تقدم ما ﷲ غفر (danbihī, ta’akkara) God has forgiven all his sins; اوربا وقت من ساعتين متقدم بغداد وقت الوسطى waqtu bagdada mutaqaddimun sā‘ataini ‘an waqti ūrubbā l-wusṭā Baghdad time is two hours ahead of Central European time; نحوه تقدم (naḥwahū) to step up to s.o.; منه تقدم to approach s.o., head for s.o.; لالمتحان تقدم to submit o.s. to an examination VI to become antiquated, grow obsolete, get out of date, become old, age │ تقادم (zamanu) much time has gone by (since); عھده تقادم (‘ahduhū) it happened long ago, it belongs to the put, it is of early date X to ask (ه s.o.) to come, send (ه for s.o.), summon (ه s.o.)
قدم qidm time long since put, old times; قدما qidman in old(en) times, in former times, once, of old, of yore
 قدم qidam time long since put, old times; remote antiquity, time immemorial; oldness; ancientness; infinite 748 pre- existence, sempiternity, timelessness (of God); seniority │ القدم منذ from times of old, by long tradition, of long standing; قدم ب عھده (qidamu ‘ahdihī) his long, standing familiarity with
قدم qadam (usually f.) pl. اقدام aqdām foot (also as a measure of length); step قدم مكعبة (muka‘‘aba) cubic foot; القدم سمت al-
q. nadir (astron.); القدم اصبع iṣba‘ al-q. toe; قدميه على (qadamaihi) on foot (of several: قدميه اطرف على :(األقدام على on tiptoe; قدم على الحذر (q. al-ḥadar) anxious, timid, fearful; واالستعداد االھبة قدم على (q. il-uhba) in a state of extreme alertness; وساق قدم على (قام) جرى (wa-sāqin) to become fully effective, be in full progress, be in full swing; قدم له ليس he has no part in ..., he is not involved in ...
قدم qudum: قدما (سار) مضى (quduman) to go straight ahead or forward
قديم qadīm pl. قدماء qudamā’ , قدامى qudāmā, قدائم qadā’im  old, ancient; antique; existing from time immemorial, eternally pre-existent, sempiternal; القديم the Infinitely Pre-existent, the Sempiternal, the Eternal (as an attribute of God) │ قديما qadīman or القديم في in old(en) times, in ancient times, in former times, once, of old, of yore; قديم من or القديم منذ from times of old. by long tradition, of long standing; ب العھد قديم (q. al-‘ahd) of long familiarity or acquaintance with, long familiar or acquainted with; of long- standing experience in, long-experiensed in, (being) a long-time holder of; دراسات قديمة classical studies
قدوم qudūm coming, advent, arrival
قدوم qadūm pl. قدم qudum bold, audacious, daring, intrepid, undaunted, courageous, brave, valiant
قدوم qadūm, qaddūm pl. قدائم qadā’im ,
قدم qudum adz
قدام quddām fare part, front part;
quddāma (prep.) in front of
قيدوم qaidūm prow, bow of a ship
االقدمون ancient; mare older, aqdam  اقدم
the ancients
اقدمية aqdamīya seniority
مقدم maqdam coming, advent; arrival
مقدام miqdām bold, audacious, daring, intrepid, undaunted, courageous, brave, valiant; a military rank, approx.: staff sergeant (Eg. 1939)
تقديم taqdīm sending forward, sending off, dispatching, etc., see II; presentation; submission, turning in, filing; offering up, oblation; dedication; offer, proffer, tender, bid; memorial; (pl. تقاديم taqādīm) officially established guardianship (Tun.)
تقدمة taqdima offer, proffer, tender, bid; dedication; (social) introduction, presentation; offering up, oblation, offertory (Chr.); (pl. -āt, تقادم taqādim ) present, gift
اقدام iqdām boldness, audacity, daring, intrepidity, fearlessness, undauntedness, stoutheartedness, pluck, courage, enterprise, initiative
تقدم taqaddum precedence, priority; (ad)vantage, lead; advance, drive, push; advancement, progression, progress
تقدمي taqaddumī progressive, progressionist
al-‘ahd t. الزمن( تقادم العھد( taqādum: تقادم time; of lapse or progression (az-zaman) time of course the in مع تقادم الزمن
قادم qādim pl. -ūn, قدوم qudūm, قدام guddām one arriving, arriver, arrival, newcomer; -- coming, next (e.g., year, month, and the like)
مقدم muqaddim offerer, tenderer, presenter, giver, donor │ الطلب مقدم m. aṭ- ṭalab applicant 749
مقدم muqaddam put before s.th. (على), prefixed, prefaced (على to s.th.), anteceding, preceding (على s.th.); front, face; fore part, front part; prow, bow (of a ship); o nose (of an airplane, and the like); antecedent of a proportion (math.); overseer, supervisor; foreman; a military rank, approx.: major (Ir., U.A.R.); lieutenant colonel (formerly syr.); officially appointed legal guardian (Tun.); administrator or trustee of a wakf estate (Tun.); عليه مقدم a legal minor placed under
 officially established guardianship (Tun.);
مقدما muqaddaman in advance, beforehand
مقدمة muqaddima, muqaddama pl. -āt fore part, front part; front, face; prow, bow (of a ship); foreground; foremost rank or line, forefront, head, lead; advance guard, vanguard, van; foreword, preface, introduction, prologue, proem, preamble; prelude; premise
متقدم mutaqaddim preceding, antecedent; moving forward, advancing; well-advanced; (being) in front, ahead, in the fore part; foremost; aforesaid, before- mentioned; advanced; senior (athlet.) │ ذكره المتقدم (dikruhū) the aforesaid, the before-mentioned; العمر في) السن في متقدم) (sinn, ‘umr) advanced in age, well along in years, old; ابانه على متقدم (ibbānihī) premature, precipitate, untimely; المتقدمون والمتأخرون (wa-l-muta’akkirūn) the earlier and the later = all
(قدو and قدا (قدي qadā u (qadw) and قدي qadiya a (قدى qadan, قداوة qadāwa) to be tasty, savory (food) VIII to imitate, copy (ب s.o., s.th.), emulate (ب s.o.), follow s.o.’s (ب) model or example, be guided (ب by)
قدوة qudwa, qidwa model, pattern, example, exemplar
قدي qadīy tasty, savory, palatable (food)
اقتداء iqtidā’ imitation, emulation; اقتداء ب iqtidā’an bi following the model or example of
قذة qudda pl. قذذ qudad, قذاذ qidād feather of an arrow │ بالقذة القذة حذو (ḥadwa) exactly identical, deceptively alike
قذر qadira a (qadar) and qadura u (قذارة qadāra) to be or become dirty, unclean, filthy II to make dirty, soil, sully, contaminate, pollute, defile (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) X to find or deem (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) dirty, unclean, impure, filthy, squalid
قذر qadar uncleanliness, impurity; (pl.
اقذار aqdār) dirt, filth, squalor
قذر qadir, qadr dirty, unclean, impure, filthy, squalid
قذر qadir dainty, fastidious, squeamish
قذارة qadāra dirtiness, uncleanliness, impurity, filthiness, squalidness
قاذورة qādūra pl. -āt dirt, filth, squalor; rubbish, garbage; (moral) defilement
مقاذر maqādir  dirty things, dirt, filth
قذع qada‘a a (qad‘) to defame, malign, vilify (ه s.o.), backbite, wag an evil tongue, make slanderous remarks
قذف qadafa i (qadf) to throw, cast (ب or ھ s.th.); to throw away, discard (ب or ھ s.th.); to fling, hurl, toss (ب or ھ s.th.); to hurl down, toss down (ب or ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to push, shove (ب or ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to row, oar (ب or ھ s.th.); to eject, emit, discharge (ب or ھ s.th.); to expel (ب or ب، ه s.o., s.th.); to evict, oust (ب or ه s.o.); to drop (ب s.th.); to pelt (ه ھ، ب s.o. with); to defame, slander, calumniate (ه s.o.); to accuse (ه ب s.o. of), charge (ه ب s.o. with); to vomit │ بالقنابل قذفه to bomb s.th., strafe s.th. with bombs; الشتائم عليه قذف to hurl abusive language at s.o. II to row, oar 750 VI to pelt one another (ب with); to throw to each other, throw back and forth (ھ s.th.); to shove around, push around (ه or ب s.o.) │ األمواج به تقاذفت (amwāju) to be tossed about by the waves VII to be thrown, be cast, be flung, be hurled, be tossed, be flung off
قذف qadf defamation; calumny, slander, false accusation (esp., of fornication; Isl. Law); rowing, oaring │ بالقنابل القذف bombing, bombardment; القنابل قذف طائرة bomber
قذفي qadfī slanderous, libelous, defamatory
(ṭayyāra) طيارة قذافة qaddāf: قذاف bomber
قذيفة qadīfa pl. قذائف qada’if  projectile; bomb; shell; fuse, detonator │ نسافة قذيفة (nassāfa) torpedo; يدوية قذيفة (yadawīya) hand grenade
مقذف miqdaf pl. مقاذف maqādif  oar, paddle
مقذاف miqdāf pl. مقاذيف maqādīf  oar, paddle
تقذيف taqdīf rowing, oaring
قاذفات القنابل pl. قاذفة القنابل qādifa: قاذفة قاذفة النار or al-lahab q. قاذفة اللھب bomber; thrower flame
 and maqādīf  مقاذيف pl. maqdūf مقذوف
مقذوفة maqdūfa pl. -āt missile; projectile
قذال qadāl pl. قذل qudul, اقذلة aqdila occiput
قذى IV: عينه اقذى (‘ainahū) to vex, annoy, gall s.o., cause s.o. worry
قذى qadan (coll.; n. un. قذاة qadāh) s.th. that gets in one's eye or into a beverage, a floating impurity, mote, speck; foreign body in the eye │ عينه في قذى (‘ainihī) an odious thing, approx.: an eyesore, a thorn in the flesh; القذى على اغضى (agḍā) to bear annoyance patiently, grin and bear it, swallow the bitter pill; القذى على جفونه غمض (gammaḍa jufūnahū) do.
قذى qidan pl. اقذاء aqdā’ fine dust; pl.
اقذاء particles floating in the air
قر qarra (1  pers. perf. qarartu) i, (1  pers. perf. qarirtu) a (قرار qarār) to settle down, establish o.s., become settled or sedentary, take up one's residence, rest, abide, dwell, live, reside, remain, stay, linger (ب or في in, at a place) │ على الرأي قر (ra’yu) it was decided to ..., the decision was reached to …, a resolution was passed on s.th. or to the effect that; على رأيه قر (ra’yuhū) to resolve, determine on s.th., make up one’s mind to (do s.th.), decide, make a decision for or on or to do s.th.; ال حال له يقر to be flighty, be of unstable temperament; قرار له يقر ال (qarār) to be restless, restive, uneasy, wavering, undecided; -- qarra a i (qarr) to be cold, chilly, cool │ عينا قر (‘ainan) to be of good cheer; عينه قرت (‘ainuhū) to be glad, be delighted (ب at) II to settle, make sedentary (ه في s.o. in, at a place), establish (ه في s.th. in); to fix, settle, appoint, assign, schedule, determine, stipulate, regulate (ھ s.th.); to decide (ھ s.th.); to determine, resolve, decide (ھ on s.th.); to confirm, establish, affirm, aver (ھ s.th.); to report, relate, tell (ھ s.th.); to make a report, give a paper (عن on); to make a statement; to force s.o. (ه) to confess or acknowledge s.th. (على or ب), make s.o. (ه) confess or acknowledge s.th. (على or ب) IV to settle, make sedentary (ھ في s.o. in, at a place), establish (ھ في s.th. in); to safeguard (ھ s.th.); to have (ه s.o.) sit down, seat (ه s.o., في in, in a seat); to set up, institute (ھ s.th.); to found, establish (ھ s.th.); to
install, instate (في s.o. in an office); to confirm, establish, affirm, aver (ھ s.th.); to agree, consent (ب or ھ to); to acknowledge, own (ب or ھ s.th.); to confess, avow, admit (ب s.th.), own (ب to s.th.); to concede, 751 grant (ھ or ل ب to
s.o. s.th.) │ عينه اقر (‘ainahū) (to cool s.o.’s eye =) to gladden, delight s.o. V to be fixed, be settled, be appointed, be scheduled, be determined, be regulated, be stipulated, be decided; to resolve itself (situation) X to settle down, establish o.s. become settled or sedentary, take up one’s residence (ب or في in. at a place); to come to rest (ب or في in, at a place); to rest, abide, dwell, live, reside, remain, stay, linger (ب or في in, at a place, الى with s.o.); to be firmly embedded, got stuck, get lodged (في in); to be firm, solid, enduring, durable, lasting, stable; to become stabilized, stabilize, be consolidated (situation, conditional; ultimately to attain (على a state or condition), finally find a firm position ( على in); to become finally (على s.th.), ultimately turn into s.th. (على); to be established, settled, fixed; to be stationary
│ على خاطره استقر (kāṭiruhū) his mind dwelled on …; على الرأي استقر (ra’yu) it was decided to the decision was reached to ...; a resolution was passed on s.th. or to the effect that; على رأيه استقر (ra’yuhū) to resolve, determine on s.th., make up one’s mind to (do s.th.), decide, make a decision for or on or to do s.th.; األمور له استقر his situation had stabilized; قرار له يستقر ال (qarārun) to be restless, restive, uneasy, wavering, undecided; حال على بعد نستقر لم (ba‘du) we haven’t yet arrived at, a lasting solution, we haven’t yet attained a definitive position; على امره استقر he finally became ..., he ended up as ...; نفسه في استقر to be a positive fact with s.o., be beyond doubt for s.o.; المكان) المقام به استقر) (muqāmu, makānu) to settle down permanently; to sit down; not to move from one’s seat; المجلس به استقر (majlisu) to sit down, get seated, take a seat; به استقر الحال to be firmly established, be settled; to be in a secure position
قر qarr cold, chilly, cool
 قر qurr cold, coldness, chilliness, coolness
قرة qirra cold, coldness, chilliness, coolness
العين قرة qurrat al-‘ain consolation for the eye; delight of the eye; joy, pleasure, delight; darling; (bot.) cress
قرار qarār sedentariness, settledness, stationariness, sedentation; fixedness, fixity; firmness, solidity; steadiness, constancy, continuance, permanency, stability; repose, rest, stillness; duration; abode, dwelling, habitation; residence; resting place; bottom (e.g., of a receptacle); depth (of the sea); (pl. -āt) decision, resolution │ له قرار ال (lā qarāra) inconstant, changeable, unstable; bottomless, unfathomable, immeasurable; القرار دار the hereafter, the world to come; O الموجه قرار q. al-maujah wave trough (techn.); التعديل قرارات modifying regulations
قرارة qarāra bottom; low ground, depression, depth │ النفس قرارة في (q. in- nafs) in the depth of the heart
قرير qarīr: العين قرير q. al-‘ain happy, gratified, delighted, glad
قارورة qārūra pl. قوارير qawārīr  long- necked bottle
مقر maqarr pl. مقار maqārr  abode, dwelling, habitation; residence; storage place; seat center; site, place; station; position (at sea) │ العمل مقر m. al-‘amal place of employment; القيادة مقر headquarters; الوظيفة مقر official seat, seat of office
تقرير taqrīr establishment, settlement; fixation; appointment, assignment, regulation, arrangement, stipulation; determination; decision; (pl. تقارير taqārīr ) report, account │ المصير تقرير self-determination (pol.); في الشعوب حق مصيرھا تقرير (ḥaqq aš-š.) the right of peoples to self-determination; الحالة تقرير ٢٥٧ الجوية (gawwīya) weather report; تقرير الشرطة t. aš-šurṭa police report
إقرار iqrār settling, settlement (of nomads); setting up, institution, establishment; foundation; installation,
instatement; delivery of a confirmation or assurance; confirmation, affirmation, averment; assurance; acknowledgment; confession, avowal, admission
استقرار istiqrār sedentariness, settledness, stationariness, sedentation; remaining, abiding, lingering, stay, sojourn; settling, settlement, establishment; steadiness, constancy, continuance, permanency; strengthening, consolidation, stabilization, stability; repose, rest, stillness
قار qārr sedentary, settled, resident; standing, permanent; fixed, stationary; cold, chilly, cool │ القارة (غير) األداءات (adā’āt) (in)direct taxes (magr.); قارة لجنة (lajna) permanent committee, standing committee
قارة qārra pl. -āt continent, mainland
مقرر muqarrir pl. -ūn reporter (in general and of a newspaper)
مقرر muqarrar established, settled; fixed, determined, decided, appointed, assigned, scheduled, regulated, stipulated, decreed; (pl. -āt) curriculum; مقررات decisions │ الميزانية مقرر m. al-mīzānīya the proposed budget; مقررة حقيقة accomplished fact; مقررة اموال direct taxes
مستقر mustaqirr sedentary, settled, resident; firmly established, deep-seated, deep-rooted; fixed, immobile, stationary; firm, solid, enduring, durable, lasting, stable
مستقر mustaqarr abode, dwelling, habitation; residence; seat; resting place
قرأ qara’a a (قراءة qirā’a) to declaim, recite (ھ s.th., esp. the Koran; على ھ to s.o. s.th.); to read (ھ s.th.; ل ھ or على s.o. s.th.); to peruse (ھ s.th.); to study (على ھ ھ under
s.o. s.th.) │ السالم عليه قرأ (salāma) to greet, salute s.o.; to extend greeting, to s.o.; قرأ
ل حسابه to reckon with s.th., take s.th. into account; حساب الف له قرأ (alfa ḥ.) to have a thousand apprehensions about s.th. IV to make or have (ه s.o.) read (ھ s.th.); to teach (ه s.o.) the art of reciting (ه s.th.); to teach (ه s.o.) how to read (ھ s.th.) │ اقرأه السالم (salāma) to extend greetings to s.o. X to ask s.o. (ه) to recite or read; to investigate, examine, explore (ھ s.th.),
 search (ھ into s.th.); to study thoroughly (
ھ s.th.)
قرء qur’ pl. قروء qurū’ menses, menstruation
قراءة qirā’a pl. -āt recitation, recital (esp. of the Koran); reading (also, e.g., of measuring instruments; parl.); manner of recitation, punctuation and vocalization of the Koranic text │ الكف قراءة q. al-kaff chiromancy, palmistry
القرآن al-qur’ān the Koran
قرآني qur’ānī Koranic, of or pertaining to the Koran
استقراء istiqrā’ pl. -āt investigation, examination, exploration; see also under قرو
قرو under see istiqrā’ī استقرائي
قارئ qārī’ pl. -ūn, قراء qurrā’ reciter (esp. of the Koran); reader │ الكف قارئ q. al-kaff chiromancer, palmist
مقروء maqrū’ read (past part.); legible, readable; worth reading
مقرئ muqri’ reciter of the Koran
قراج qarāž pl. -āt (Saudi Arabian spelling) garage
 قرب qaruba u (qurb, مقربة maqraba) to be near (الى or من to s.o., to s.th.); to come near, get close (الى or من to s.o., to s.th.), close in (الى or من on s.o., on s.th.), approach 753
(الى or من s.o., s.th.); to approximate (الى or من s.th.); - qariba a to be near (ه ھ، to s.o., to s.th.); to come near, get close (ه ھ، to s.o., to s.th.), close in (ه ھ، on s.o., on
s.th.), approach (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to approximate (ھ s.th.); to draw near, be coming on, approach │ من يقرب ما (yaqrubu) (with foll. figure) approximately, about, some, circa II to cause or allow (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) to come near or get close (الى or من to s.th.), make or let (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) approach (الى or من s.th.), bring close (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.; الى or من to s.th.), advance, move (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.; الى or من toward s.th.), approximate (o s.th.; الى or من to); to bring home (من ھ or الى to
s.o. s.th., e.g., an idea); to take as associate or companion (ه من s.o. for o.s.); to bring
closer to comprehension, reveal more fully (ھ s.th.), clarify the concept, facilitate the understanding (ھ of s.th.) ; to offer up, present (ل ھ to God as sacrifice); (Chr.) to administer Communion (ه to s.o.); to sheathe, put into the scabbard (ھ the sword) │ بينھم قرب to bring people closer together, make peace among people, reconcile people III to be near (ھ، ه to s.o., to s.th.); to come near, come close, get close (ه ھ، to s.o., to s.th.), close in (ه ھ، on s.o., on s.th.), approach (ه ھ،
s.o., s.th.); to approximate (ھ s.th.); to be almost equivalent (ھ with s.th.), amount to almost the same thing (ھ as s.th.); to be on the point (ان of doing s.th.), be about ( ان to do s.th.); to bring (close) together (بين و – different things) V to approach (من or الى s.o., s.th.), come or get near s.o., near s.th. (من or الى), come close, get close (من or الى to s.o.), gain access (من or الى to s.o.); to seek to gain s.o.’s (الى) favor, curry favor (الى with s.o.); (Chr.) to receive Communion VI to be or come near each other, approach one another, approximate each other VIII to approach ( من s.o., s.th.), come, advance, or get near
s.o. or s.th. (من), come close, get close (من to) X to find near, regard as near (ھ s.th.)
قرب qurb nearness, closeness, proximity, vicinity; qurba (prep.) in the vicinity of, near, toward │ الظھر قرب  qurba ẓ-ẓuhr toward noon; بقرب or بالقرب من in the vicinity of, near, close to; قرب عن from a short distance, from close up
قربة qirba pl. -āt, قرب qirab waterskin;
-- (pl. قرب qirab) bagpipe
قربى qurbā relation, relationship, kinship │ القربى ذو pl. القربى ذوو dawū l-q. relative, relation
قريب qarīb near (in place and time), nearby, close at hand; in the neighborhood or vicinity (الى or من of s.o., of s.th.), close (الى or من to s.o., to s.th.), adjacent (الى or من to s.th.); easily understood, simple; (pl. اقرباء aqribā’ ) relative, relation; قريبا qarīban soon, before long, shortly, in the near future; recently, lately, not long ago, the other day │ قريب من and قريب عما (‘ammā q.) soon, before long, shortly, in the near future; بعيد او قريب من – ال not -- in the least, not by a far cry; العاجل القريب في in
 the immediate future; الحسن من قريب (ḥasan) fair, fairly good (as a school- report grade); العھد قريب q. al-‘ahd recent, new, young; قريب عھد من since recently, of late, of a recent date; recently, lately, not long ago, the other day; ب العھد قريب having adopted or acquired s.th. very recently; not long familiar or acquainted with s.th., inexperienced at s.th., a novice in s.th.; التناول قريب q. at-tanāwul easy to understand
قراب qirāb pl. قرب qurub, اقربة aqriba sheath, scabbard (of a .word); receptacle, container, case, etui, covering
قرابة qarāba relation, relationship, kinship 754
قرابة qurāba: اعوام ثالثة قرابة qurabata talātati a‘wām almost three years
قربان qurbān pl. قرابين qarābīn  sacrifice, offering, immolation, oblation; Mass (Chr.); Eucharist (Chr.) │ الشكر قربان
q. aš-šukr thank offering; القربان عيد ‘īd al-
q. Corpus Christi (Chr.); القربان تناول (tanāwala) to receive Communion (Chr.); على القربان رفع or على القربان قدم (qaddama) to read Mass for s.o. (Chr.)
قربانة qurbāna Host; Communion (Chr.)
اقرب aqrab  nearer, nearest, next; more probable, more likely; probable, likely; pl. اقربون aqrabūn, اقارب aqārib  relations, relatives │ الفھم الى اقرب (fahm) easier to understand, more comprehensible; اقرب ھم الصواب) الصحة الى) (ṣiḥḥa, ṣawab) it is quite probable, it is fairly correct, it is rather exact, it comes fairly close to the troth; في ممكن) وقت اقرب) fī aqrabi waqtin (mumkinin) or يمكن ما باقرب (yumkinu) as soon as possible, in the shortest time possible
مقرب maqrab pl. مقارب maqārib  nearest or shortest way, short cut
مقربة maqraba, maqruba nearness, closeness, proximity, vicinity; (pl. مقارب maqārib ) nearest or shortest way, short cut │ مقربة على nearby, close at hand; على مقربة in the vicinity of, near, close to
تقريبا │ approximation taqrīb تقريب t-t. bi-wajh بالتقريب، بوجه التقريب taqrīban, almost, approximately, على التقريب or
nearly, roughly, about; تقريبا محسوس just barely perceptible
تقريبي taqrībī approximate, approximative
تقرب taqarrub approach; approximation (من to)
تقارب taqārub mutual approach; mutual approximation; rapprochement
اقتراب iqtirāb approach; approximation
مقرب muqarrab pl. -ūn close companion, favorite, protégé, intimate
مقارب muqārib approximate, approximative, estimated; mediocre, medium, of medium quality
متقارب mutaqārib close together, following in close intervals, consecutive, successive, subsequent; المتقارب  name of a poetical meter
قارب qārib pl. قوارب qawārib  boat, skiff │ قارب q. az-zubda (eg.) sauceboat for melted butter; قارب (musallaḥ) gunboat; النجاة قارب q. an-najāh lifeboat; التنقيب قارب األلغام عن mine sweeper; ناري قارب motorboat
قواربي qawāribī boatman
قربوس qarabūs (qarbūs) pl. قرابيس qarābīs 
saddlebow
قربينة qarabīna pl. -āt carbine
قرح qaraḥa a (qarḥ) to wound (ه s.o.); -- qariḥa a (qaraḥ) to ulcerate, fester; to be covered with ulcers, be ulcerous II to wound (ه s.o.) V to ulcerate, fester; to be covered with ulcers, be ulcerous VIII to invent, originate, think up (ھ s.th.); to improvise, extemporize, deliver off-hand ( ھ a speech); to demand in a brash or imperious manner (ھ or على ب of s.o. s.th.); to propose, suggest (على ھ to s.o. s.th.)
قرح garḥ pl. قروح qurūḥ wound; ulcer, sore
قرح qariḥ covered with ulcers, ulcerous, ulcerated; ulcerating, festering
قرحة qarḥa pl. قرح qiraḥ ulcer, sore; abscess, boil │ الرخوة القرحة (rakwa) soft chancre, chancroid (med.)
 قراح qarāḥ pure, limpid, clear (esp. water) 755
قريح qarīḥ pure, limpid, clear (esp. water)
قريحة qarīḥa pl. قرائح qarā’iḥ  natural disposition, innate disposition, bent; genius, talent, gift, faculty
تقرح taqarruḥ ulceration
اقتراح iqtirāḥ invention, improvisation; (pl. -āt) proposition, proposal, suggestion; motion
مقرح muqarraḥ covered with ulcers, ulcerous, ulcerated
متقرح mutaqarriḥ covered with ulcers, ulcerous, ulcerated; ulcerating, festering
مقترح muqtaraḥ pl. -āt proposition, proposal, suggestion; motion
قرد qird pl. قردة qirada, قرود qurūd ape, monkey
قرد qurd (coll.; n. un. ة) tick (zool.)
قراد qurād (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. قردان qirdān tick, ticks (zool.) │ قردان ابو abū q. (eg.) white egret (zool.)
مقرود maqrūd exhausted
قريدس quraidis (syr.) shrimp (zool.)
قرس qarasa a (qaras) to he severe, fierce, biting, grim (the cold) II to freeze, make torpid, (be)numb, nip (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.; of the cold)
قارس qāris severe, fierce, biting, grim (of the cold); very cold, bitterly cold, freezing, frozen
قرش qaraša i u (qarš) to gnash, grind (one’s teeth); to nibble, crunch, chew (ھ s.th.); -- qaraša i (qarī), II and VIII to earn money, make a living (لعياله li-‘iyālihī for one’s family)
قرش qirš shark (zool.); (pl. قروش qurūš) piaster │ صاغ قرش (eg., = ½ Eg. pound) standard piaster; تعريفة قرش (eg., = ½ قرش صاغ) little piaster
قريش quraiš Koreish, name of an ھrab tribe in ancient Mecca
قرشي qurašī of, pertaining to, or belonging to the Koreish tribe; Koreishite
قريش qarīš, قريشة qarīša sour cheese
مقرش muqriš rich, well-to-do, prosperous, wealthy, moneyed
قرص qaraṣa u (qarṣ) to pinch, nip, tweak (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to scratch (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to bite, sting (ه s.o.; of a gnat, flea, and the like) │ بلسانه قرصه (bi-lisānihī to hurt s.o. with words II to pinch or nip sharply, tweak (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to scratch all over ( ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to shape into round, flat loaves (العجين the dough)
قرص qurṣ pl. اقراص aqrāṣ round, flat loaf of bread; (flat, circular) plate, disk, discus; phonograph record, disc; sheave, pulley (mech.); tablet, pastille, lozenge, troche │ األرقام قرص dial (of a telephone); عجوة اقراص a. ‘ajwa a pastry mode of rich dough with almonds and date paste (syr.); عسل قرص q. ‘asal honeycomb; النار جلب لقرصه (nāra) approx.: to feather one’s nest, have an eye out for one’s own interest, know on which side one’s bread is buttered
قرصي qurṣī: الشكل قرصي q. aš-šakl disk- like, disk-shaped, discoid, discous
قرصة qurṣa pl. قرص quraṣ round, flat loaf of bread
قرصة qarṣa pl. qaraṣāt pinch, nip, tweak; bite, sting (of s gnat, lies, and the like); crowbar, pinch bar, handspike, lever
قريص qurraiṣ stinging nettle (Urtica urens L.; bot.)
قراصة qarrāṣa pincers, nippers
قراصية qarāṣīya (syr.) small, black plums; (eg.) prunes 756
قارص qāriṣ, biting; stinging; painful, nipping, tormenting (e.g., cold) │ قوارص الكلمات q. al-kalimāt biting words
قرصنة qarṣana piracy, robbery on the high seas freebooting
قراصين qarāṣin , قراصن pl. qurṣān قرصان
qarāṣīn  corsair, pirate, freebooter
قرض qaraḍ i (qarḍ) to cut, sever, cut off, clip ( ھ s.th.); to gnaw (ھ s.th. or on s.th.), nibble (ھ s.th. or at s.th.), bite, champ (ھ s.th.), eat (ھ into s.th.), corrode (ھ s.th.) │ رباطه قرض (ribāṭahū) to die; الشعر قرض (ši‘ra) to write poetry, make verses II = I;
IV	 to loan, lend, or advance, money (ه to s.o.); to lend (ه ھ to s.o. s.th.) VI تقارضوا الثناء (tanā’a) they competed in the recital of eulogies VII to die out; to become extinct; to perish VIII to raise a loan (من with), borrow (من from) X to ask for a loan (من s.o.)
قرض qarḍ (qirḍ) pl. قروض qurūḍ loan
│ حسن قرض (ḥasan) interest-free loan with unstipulsted due dste; مالي قرض (mālī) (monetary) loan; القرض اسھم ashum al-q. bonds
قريض qarīḍ poetry
قراضة qurāḍa pl. -āt chips, shreds, parings, shavings, scraps; iron filings
قراضة qarrāḍa clothes moth
maqārīḍ  مقاريض pl. miqrāḍ مقراض
scissors
انقراض inqirāḍ dying out, gradual disappearance; extinction
اقتراض iqtirāḍ loan
استقراض istiqrāḍ raising of a loan; loan
القوارض al-qawāriḍ the rodents
مقرض muqriḍ pl. -ūn moneylender; lender
منقرض munqariḍ extinct, exterminated, perished
قرط qaraṭa u (qarṭ) to cut into small pieces, chop, mince (ھ s.th.) II do.; to snuff, trim (ھ a candle, a wick); to squeeze (على s.th.); (eg.) to urge, ply (على s.o.); to be stern, be strict (على with s.o.); to beset, harass, press hard (على s.o.); to give little (على to s.o.), be illiberal, be stingy (على with s.o.), scrimp (على s.o.)
قروط qirāṭ, قراط aqrāṭ, اقراط pl. qurṭ قرط
qurūṭ earring; eardrop, pendant for the ear
تقريطة taqrīṭa pl. تقاريط taqārīṭ  wrapper worn by women (tun.)
 قيراط pl. قراريط look up alphabetically
قرطجنة see قرطاجنة
قرطاس qirṭās pl. قراطيس qarāṭīs  paper; sheet of paper; paper bag
قرطبة qurṭuba  Cordova (city in Spain)
Carthage قرطاجنة qarṭajanna , قرطجنة
قرطس qarṭas paper; sheet of paper
قرطم qarṭ□ama to cut off, clip (ھ s.th.)
قرطم qirṭim, qurṭum safflower (Carthamus tinctorius; bot.)
قرطمان qurṭumān oats
قرظ II to praise, commend, laud, extol, acclaim (ه s.o.); to eulogize (ھ s.th.), lavish praise (ھ on)
قرظ qaraẓ pods of a species of sant tree (Acacia nilotica; bot.)
قريظ qarīẓ eulogy, encomium, panegyric
taqārīẓ  تقاريظ -āt, pl. taqrīẓ تقريظ
eulogy, encomium, panegyric
قرع qara‘a a (qar‘) to knock, rap (ھ at s.th.); to hit, bump (ھ s.th. or against s.th.); to strike, beat, thump (ھ against s.th.; ه ھ، ب s.o., s.th. with; على ب with s.th. on or s.th. else); to thrash. spank (ه ب ه s.o. with); to clink, touch (ھ glasses); to 757 ring, sound (e s.th.); -- qari‘a (qara‘) to be or become bald(headed); to be empty, bare, stark (place) │ الجرس قرع (jarasa) to ring the bell; سمعه قرع (sam‘ahū) to reach s.o.’s ear; سنه قرع (sinnahū) to gnash one’s teeth; الندم سن قرع على) ل) (sinna n-nadam) to repent s.th.; ضميره قرعه ḍamīrahū) his conscience tormented or smote him, he had a guilty conscience, he felt grave compunctions; الكأس قرع (ka’sa) to touch glasses, drink to s.o.’s (ل) health II to scold, chide, opbraid (ه s.o.), snap (ه at s.o.); to rebuke, blame, censure (ه s.o.) III to fight, come to blows (ه with s.o.); to bottle, fight (ه s.o.); to contend by force of arms (عن ه with s.o. for s.th.); to cast or draw lots (ه with s.o.) VI to hump against each other, clash; to cast lots among each other (على for) VIII to cast lots among each other (على for); to vote, take a vote (على on); to draw lots (ه for s.o.). choose by lot (ه s.o.); to muster, recruit (ه s.o.; mil.); to elect (ھ, s.o., s.th.)
قرع qar‘ knock(ing), rap(ping), beating, striking, thumping; ring(ing)
قرع qar‘ (coll.; n. un. ة) gourd, pumpkin
│ صروف قرع (eg.) bottle gourd, calabash (Lagenaria vulgaris Ser.; bot.); كوسى قرع
q. kūsā (eg., syr.) zucchini (bot.)
 قرع qara‘ boldness, boldheadedness; emptiness, bareness, starkness
قرعة qar‘a (n. vic.) knock, rap, blow, stroke, thump; -- (n. un.) gourd, pumpkin; skull, head
قرعي qar‘ī gourd-, pumpkin- (in compounds), cucurbitaceous
قرعة qur‘a pl. قرع qura‘ lot; ballot; lot- casting; (mil.) conscription, recruitment (by lot), balloting │ عسكرية قرعة (‘askarīya) enlistment, draft, recruitment (mil.); القرعة انفار drafted recruits
قراع qurā‘, القراع مرض maraḍ al-qurā‘ a skin disease, ringworm (med.)
قريع qar‘ exquisite, select │ الدھر قريع q. ad-dahr the greatest hero of his time
اقرع aqra‘  bald; baldheaded; empty, bare, stark; scabby, scurfy
مقرعة miqra‘a pl. مقارع maqāri‘  knocker, rapper (of a door); whip, switch; cudgel, club
تقريع taqrī‘ chiding, scolding, reproof, rebuke, censure
مقارعة muqāra‘a fight, struggle (with genit. = against)
اقتراع iqtirā‘ pl. -āt balloting, recruitment, draft (mil.); vote (على on); election
قارعة qāri‘a pl. قوارع qawāri‘  (sudden) misfortune, calamity; adversity; القارعة the hour of the Last Judgment │ الطريق قارعة middle of the road, roadway; road, highway; الطرق قارعة على (ṭuruq) on the open road
قرف qarafa i (qarf) to peel, pare, bark, derind ( ھ s.th.); -- qarifa a (qaraf) to loathe (ھ s.th.), feel disgust (ھ for), be nauseated (ھ by) II to peel, pare, bark, derind (ھ s.th.); to be loathsome, arouse disgust III to let
o.s. be tempted (ھ to a sin), yield (e to a desire) VIII to commit, perpetrate (ھ a crime)
قرف qaraf loathing, disgust, detestation
قرفة qirfa pl. قرف qiraf rind, bark, skin, crust; scab, scurf; cinnamon
قرافة qarāfa (eg.) cemetery, specif., graveyard below the Mokattam Hills near Cairo
قريفة qarīfa ill humor, ill temper
قرفان qarfān (eg.) disgusted, nauseated, sink and tired
اقتراف iqtirāf commission, perpetration (of a crime) 758
مقرف muqrif loathsome, disgusting, nauseating, repulsive, detestable
مقترف muqtarif perpetrator (of a crime)
قرفص qarfaṣa to squat on the ground (with thighs against the stomach and arms enfolding the legs)
قرفصاء qurfuṣā’  squatting, squatting position │ القرفصاء (قعد) جلس (qurfuṣā’a) to squat on one’s heels
قرفال qarfāl (coll.; n. un. ة) vetch قرق qaraqa u (qarq) to cluck (hen) قرقذان qarqadān squirrel
قرقر qarqara (قرقرة qarqara) to roll; to rumble (stomach); to bray (camel); to coo (pigeon); to purr (cat)
قرقرة qarqara pl. قراقر qarāqir  rumbling noise (in the stomach); gurgle; braying (of a camel); cooing (of a pigeon); purr(ing) (of a cat)
قرقوش qarqūš pl. قراقيش qarāqīš  cartilage
قرقوشة qarqūša pl. قراقيش qarāqīš  (eg.) a kind of crisp cookies
مقرقش muqarqaš (eg.) crisp(ed)
قرقض qarqaḍa (eg.) to gnaw, bite (ھ on s.th.)
teeth one’s gnash to قرقض على اسنانه │
قرقع qarqa‘a to be noisy, boisterous; to creak, grate; to crack, pop │ بالضحك) ضاحكا قرقع or) (ḍaḥk) to burst into loud laughter, laugh noisily, guffaw; بسوطه قرقع (bi- sauṭihī) to crack the whip
قرقعة qarqa‘a uproar, din, noise; creaking, creaks, grating; crack(ing), pop(ping); rumble, rumbling
قرقوز qaraqōz (from Turk. karagöz) chief character of the Turkish shadow play
قرة  قرقول see قرقول
  قرم qarama i (qarm) to gnaw (ھ on s.th.), nibble (ھ at s.th.)
قرم qarm pl. قروم qurūm studhorse; lord, master
قرام qirām blanket, carpet, curtain
maqārim  مقارم pl. miqram مقرم
bedcover, bedspread.
  قرمة qurma pl. قرم quram (eg.) tree stump; log, block of wood; chopping block
 القرم al-qirim and القريم al-qirīm the Crimea
قرمد qarmada to plaster, coat with plaster (ھ s.th.); to tile, cover with tile (ھ s.th.)
قرمد qarmad (coll.) plaster; plaster of Paris
قرميد qirmīd (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. قراميد qarāmīd  (fired) brick, roof tile; plaster of Paris
قرمز qirmiz kermes (the dried bodies of the female kermes insect, coccus ilicis, which yield a red dyestuff)
قرمزي qirmizī crimson, carmine; scarlet
│ القرمزي الحمى (ḥummā) scarlet fever (med.)
قرمش qarmaša (eg.) to eat s.th. dry (ھ), crunch, nibble
مقرمش muqarmaš dry, crisp
 قرمطي qarmaṭī Karmathian (adj. and n.); pl.
قرامطة qarāmiṭa Karmathians
 قرموط qarmūṭ pl. قراميط qarāmīṭ  a variety of sheatfish (zool.; Eg.)
قرن qarana i (qarn) to connect, link, join, unite, combine, associate (الى or ھ ب s.th. with); to add (ھ الى s.th. to); to couple, yoke together, hitch together, put together, bind together (ھ s.th.) III to unite, join forces, associate (ه with s.o.); to be simultaneous, go hand in hand (ھ with s.th.); to compare (ه ھ، ب or وبين -- بين s.o., s.th. with; شيئين بين two things with one another), draw a parallel (وبين -- بين between -- and; شيئين بين between two things) IV to combine, 759 interrelate (بين شيئين two things) VIII to be connected, be linked, be joined, be united, be combined, be associated (ب with); to combine, associate, unite (ب with); to get married, be married (ب to), marry (ب s.o.); to be
coupled, be interconnected, be yoked together, be tied together, be bound together; to become interlinked, become concatenate X to ripen, suppurate, come to a head (of a furuncle)
قرن qarn pl. قرون qurūn horn (of an animal; as a wind instrument); feeler, tentacle, antenna; top, summit, peak (of a mountain); the lint visible part of the rising sun; capsule, pod (bot.); century │ القرن ام rhinoceros; القرن وحيد do.; القرنين ذو dū l-qarnain the two-horned (an epithet given to Alexander the Great); البحر قرن q. al-baḥr coral; سمعي قرن (sam‘ī) ear trumpet (= Fr, cornet acoustique); القرون الوسطى (wusṭā) the Middle Ages
قرني qarnī horny, corneous, of born, hornlike; leguminous, pertaining to, or of the nature of, legumes; centennial, centenary
قرنية qarnīya cornea (anat.)
قرن qirn pl. اقران aqrān (matched) opponent in battle; an equal, a peer, a match; companion, mate, fellow, associate; equal, like
qurānī قراني quran, قرن pl. qurna قرنة
salient angle, nook, corner
قرين qarīn pl. قرناء quranā’  connected, joined, linked, combined, united, associated, affiliated; companion, mate, fellow, associate, comrade; husband, spouse, consort; qarīna (prep.) in connection with, in conjunction with, upon, at │ القرين منقطع munqaṭi‘ al-q. matchless, peerless, unrivaled, incomparable, unique, singular
قرينة qarīna pl. -āt wife, spouse, consort; female demon haunting women, specif., a childbed demon; eclampsia (med.); -- (pl. قرائن qarā’in) connection, conjunction, union, relation, affiliation, association, linkage; (semantic or syntactical) coherence, context; evidence, indication, indicium │ قرينته السيدة (sayyida) his wife (formal style); قرائن األحوال the concatenation of circumstances, the indicia, factual evidence; الى قرينة ضم قرينة (ḍamm) combination
 اقرن aqran , f. قرناء qarnā’  horned, horny; one with eyebrows grown together
│ قرن حية (ḥayya) cerastes, horned viper
قران qirān close union, close connection: conjunction (astron.); marriage, wedding
مقارنة muqārana pl. -āt comparison │ اللغات مقارنة m. al-lugāt comparative linguistics
اقتران iqtirān connection, conjunction, union, association, affliliation; link, connectedness, simultaneous interaction; conjunction (astron.); new moon (as an astronomical aspect); marriage, wedding
مقرون maqrūn connected, joined, linked, combined, united, associated, affiliated (ب with) │ الحاجبين مقرون m. al- ḥājibain having joined eyebrows
مقارن muqārin comparative (science)
قرنبيط qarnabīṭ cauliflower
قرنفل quranful carnation; clove
جوز قره (Eg. spelling; pronounced ’aragōz) Karagōz, chief character of the shadow play; Punch
قول قره qaraqōl pl. -āt police station; guard (military, police) │ الشرف قول قره q. aš- šaraf guard of honor 760
قرو V to follow up, investigate (ھ s.th.), inquire (. into); to check. verify (ھ s.th.) X to follow (ھ s.th.); to pursue (ھ s.th., e.g., a problem); to examine, study, investigate (ھ s.th.); to explore (ھ s.th.)
قرو qano pl. J) qurllw watering trough
│ قرو خشب kašab q. oak (wood)
استقراء istiqrā’ induction (philos.); see also under قرأ
استقرائي istiqrā’ī inductive (philos.)
قرواطيا qaruwāṭiya Croatia
قرواطي qaruwāṭī Croatian
قرى see قروي
قرى qara i (قرى qiran) to receive hospitably, entertain (ه s.o.) VIII = I
قرى qiran hospitable reception, entertainment (of a guest); meal served to a guest
قرية qarya pl. قرى quran village; hamlet; small town; rural community; القريتان al-qaryatān Mecca and Taif; Mecca and Medina │ القرى ام umm al-qurā Mecca
قروي qarawī village-, country- (in compounds), rustic, rural; peasant (adj.); (pl. قرويون qarawīyūn) villager, rustic, countryman, inhabitant of the country; from Kairouan, Kairouan (adj.), an inhabitant of Kairouan; a member of al Qarawiya College in Fès (Morocco) │ القرويين جامع mosque and college in Fès (Morocco); والقروية البلدية الشؤون وزارة (baladīya) Ministry of Municipal and Rural Affairs (Eg.)
قروية qarawīya countrywoman, peasant woman
قرية qarīya pl. قرايا qarāyā yard (naut.)
مقرى miqran vary hospitable مقراء miqrā’ very hospitable قار qārin villager
قريدس quraidis (syr.) shrimp (zool.)
قز qazza (1  pers. perf. qazaztu) u to loathe, detest (عن or ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) II to vitrify (ھ s.th.); to glaze (ھ s.th.) V to feel disgust ( عن or من at), be nauseated (عن or من by), loathe, detest, abhor (عن or من s.o., s.th.), have an aversion (عن or من to)
قز qazz pl. قزوز quzūz silk; raw silk
قزاز qizāz (eg.) glass
قزاز qazzāz silk merchant
قزازة qizāza pl. -āt, قزائز qazā’iz  (eg.) bottle
قازوزة look up alphabetically
تقزز taqazzuz loathing, disgust, detestation, abhorrence, aversion
قزان (Turk. kazan) qazān pl. -āt kettle, large boiler
قزح II to embellish (ھ one’s speech)
قزح قوس qausu qazaḥin or qausu quzaḥa rainbow
قزحية quzaḥīya iris (anat.)
قزع qaza‘ (coll.; n. un. ة) wind-driven, tattered clouds, scud; tuft of hair
قزعة (eg.) quz‘a dwarf, midget, pygmy
 قزيعة qazī‘a tuft of hair
قزقز gazqaza (eg.) to crack (ھ nuts, shells)
قزل qazal limp(ing)
قزم qazam pl. اقزام aqzām dwarf, midget, pygmy; Lilliputian; little fellow, shrimp, hop-o’-my-thumb, whippersnapper
قزموغرافيا quzmūgrāfiyā cosmography
قزموغرافي quzmūgrāfī cosmographic(al)
قزان look up alphabetically
قزوين بحر baḥr qazwīn Caspian Sea 761
قس qassa u (qass) to seek, pursue (ھ s.th.), strive (ھ for), aspire (ھ to) V do.
قس qass, qiss pl. قسوس qusūs, قسس qusus priest, presbyter, clergyman, minister, parson, vicar, curate, pastor (Chr.); -- qass (= قص) sternum, breastbone
قساس qassās slanderer
قسيس qissīs pl. -ūn, قساوسة qasāwisa, قسان qussān, اقسة aqissa, (Copt.-Chr.) قساء qussā’ priest, presbyter, clergyman, minister, parson, vicar, curate, pastor (Chr.)
قسوسة qusūsa ministry, priesthood, presbyterate (Chr.)
قسوسية رسامة risāma qusūsīya ordination (of a priest; Chr.)
قسر qasara i (qasr) to force, compel, coerce, constrain (ه على s.o. to do s.th.); to conquer, subdue, subjugate (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.)
VIII = I
قسر qasr force, compulsion, coercion, constraint; قسرا qasran compulsorily, forcibly, by force; of necessity, necessarily, inevitably, perforce
اقتسار iqtisār conquest, subdual, subjugation
قسط II to distribute (ھ s.th.); to pay in installments (ھ s.th.) IV to act justly, in fairness, equitably
قسط qisṭ justice, fairness, equity, equitableness, fair-mindedness, rightness, correctness; (for sg. and pl.) just, fair, equitable, fair-minded, right, correct; -- (pl. اقساط aqsāt) part; share, allotment; portion; installment; quantity, amount,
measure, extent │ اقساط على by installments, gradually; من كبير قسط على كان to possess s.th. (a quality, a characteristic) to a large extent, have a great deal of ...
قسط qasaṭ stiffness of a joint, ankylosis (med.)
اقسط aqsaṭ juster, fairer; more correct
تقسيط taqsīṭ payment in installments │ بالتقسيط in installments, gradually
مقسط muqsiṭ acting justly or with fairness, doing right; just, fair
قسطر qasṭara to test the genuineness (ھ of coins)
قسطاس qusṭās, qisṭās pl. قساطيس qasāṭīs 
balance, scales
 قسطل qasṭal pl. قساطل qasāṭil  water pipe, water main
 قسطل qasṭal (eg.) chestnut
 القساطلة بالد bilād al-qasāṭila Castile, Spain
القسطنطينية al-qasṭanṭīnīya Constantinople
قسم qasama i (qasm) to divide, part, split (ھ s.th.); to distribute, deal out, parcel out (ھ على s.th. to, among), divide ( ه على s.th. among); to let s.o. (ل) share (في s.th.). give s.o. (ل) a .hare of s.th. (في), allot (ل في to s.o. s.th.); to divide, subdivide, partition, portion, break up (الى ھ s.th. into), arrange, classify (ه الى s.th. in); to partition, to compartment (ھ s.th.); to assign, apportion, decree, destine, foreordain (على ھ or ل to s.o. s.th.; of God or of fate); to divide (على ھ a number by another) II to divide, part, split (ھ s.th.); to distribute, deal out, parcel out, divide (ھ بين s.th. among); to divide, subdivide, partition, portion, break up (ھ s.th., ھ or الى into), section (ھ s.th.), arrange, classify (ھ s.th., ھ or الى in); to partition, to compartment (ھ s.th.); (Chr.) to consecrate, ordain (ھ s.o.); to exorcise a devil or demon (على from s.o., by adjuration) III to share (ه ھ with s.o. s.th.); to bind o.s. by oath (ه على to s.o. to do s.th.) IV to take an oath, swear (ب by; على ل to s.o. s.th.; ان على to do s.th.) │ عليه اقسم فعله اال (illā fa‘alahū) to adjure or entreat
s.o. to do s.th.; ايمانھم جھد اقسموا (jahda aimānihim) 762 they swore by all that is right and holy, they swore the most
 solemn oaths; بمقدساتا اقسم (muqadasātihī) to swear by all that’s holy V to be divided, be parted, be split; to be distributed, be parceled out; to share (ھ ه، a possession), divide among themselves (ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to scatter, disperse (ھ s.th.); to drive away, dispel (ھ s.th.); to beset grievously, harass or torment jointly (ه s.o.) │ ضربا تقسموه  وجيعا (ḍarban) they took turns in dealing him painful blows, they gave him a severe beating VI to divide or distribute among themselves (ھ s.th.); to beset, harass, torment (ه s.o.; thoughts, worries, etc.) VII to be divided, be parted, be split; to be distributed, be dispersed, be separated; to be divided, be subdivided, be portioned, be broken up (الى into) VIII to divide or distribute among themselves (ھ s.th.) X to seek an oracle from the deity, cast lots
قسم qism pl. اقسام aqsām part, share, allotment; portion; division, compartment; section; department; group, class; district, precinct; police precinct, police station (Eg.); administrative subdivision of a muḥāaẓa (Eg.); subcommittee; kind, sort, specimen, species
قسمة qisma dividing, division, distribution, allotment, apportionment; (math.) division (على by); (pl. قسم qisam) part, portion, share, allotment; lot, destiny, fate (foreordained by God)
قسما oath; aqsām اقسام pl. qasam قسم
qasaman I swear! ب قسما I swear by …!
قسمات qasamāt, qasimāt features, lineaments (of the face)
قسام qasām and قسامة qasāma beauty, elegance
قسيم qasīm pl. قسماء qusamā’ , اقسماء aqsimā’  sharer, partner, copartner, participant; -- (pl. اقسماء aqsimā’ ) part, portion, share, allotment; counterpart
قسيمة qasīma pl. قسائم qasā’im  coupon; receipt
تقسيم taqsīm exorcism; (pl. -āt) dividing, division, partition, parting, splitting, sectioning, portioning; distribution, allotment, apportionment; dealing out; division, subdivision, partition(ment); pl. تقاسيم taqāsīm  structure, build, proportions (e.g., of the body); -- solo recital (mus.)
تقسيمة taqsīma pl. تقاسيم taqāsīm  short solo piece for an instrument (mus.)
مقاسمة muqāsama partnership, participation, sharing
انقسام inqisām division, split, disruption, breakup; schism
اقتسام iqtisām dividing, division, distribution (among themselves)
قام qāsim divider; distributor; divisor, denominator (math.)
مقسوم maqsūm dividend (math.); مقسوم عليه divisor (math.)
مقسم muqassim divider; distributor
مقاسم muqāsim sharer, partner, co- partner, participant
قسنطينة qusanṭīna  Constantine (city in NE Algeria)
قسو) قسا) qasā u (قسوة qaswa, قساو qasāwa) to be harsh, stern, cruel, merciless, remorseless (على toward s.o.); to handle roughly, treat harshly, severely, cruelly, without mercy (على s.o.) II to harden, indurate, render obdurate or impenitent (ھ the heart) III to undergo, suffer, endure, sustain, bear, stand (ھ s.th.), bear up (ھ against s.th.) IV = II
قسو qasw hardness, harshness, grimness, sternness, severity, rigor, austerity
قسوة qaswa, hardness, harshness, grimness, sternness, severity, rigor, austerity; cruelty, mercilessness, remorselessness 763
قساوة qasāwa hardness, harshness, grimness, sternness, severity, rigor, austerity; cruelty, mercilessness, remorselessness
قسى qusīy hard, solid, firm
اقسى aqsā harder, harsher, sterner, severer; more cruel; more difficult
مقاساة muqāsāh undergoing, suffering, enduring, sustaining, bearing, standing
قاس qāsin pl. قساة qusāh hard, harsh, grim, stern, severe, austere, rough; cruel, inexorable, relentless, merciless, remorseless; difficult
 قسو see qasīy قسي 
 قسي qusīy, qisīy pl. of قوس qaus
قش qašša i u (qašš) to collect, gather (up), pick up (ھ s.th.); to pick up from here and there (ھ s.th.); to become dry, dry up, shrivel up, wither (esp., of a plant) II to take of this and that
wool; steel قش الحديد │ straw qašš قش
القش حمى ḥummā l-q. bay fever
قشة ثقاب │ straw a un.) (n. qašša قشة
match, matchstick; قشة خيار (eg.) gherkins
قشيش qašīš sweepings, rubbish, garbage, trash, refuse; offal, waste, scrap
مقشة miqašša (eg.) broom, besom
قشب qišb, qašab pl. اقشاب aqšāb poison
قشيب qašīb pl. قشب qušub new; clean; polished, burnished
قشد qašada u (qašId) to skim, take off (ھ the cream)
قشدة qišda cream
قشر qašara i u (qašr) to peel, pare, shell, derind, bark, skin, scale, shave off, husk, shuck (ھ s.th.) II = I; V to be peeled, be pared, be shelled, be derinded, be barked, be skinned, be scaled, be shaved off, be husked, be shucked; to come off in scales, scale off, flake off, peel off (skin; coating)
VII = V
قشر qišr pl. قشور qušūr cover(ing), integument, envelope; shell; peel; rind, bark; skin, crust; scab; scurf; hull, husk, shuck; scales (of fish); slough (of a snake); pl. قشور trash, garbage, refuse; trivialities, banalities; externals, superficialities, formalities; dandruff │ الرأس قشر q. ar-ra’s dandruff
قشرة qišra peel, rind (e.g., of a fruit), shell (of an egg, of a nut); bark; skin; crust; scab; scurf; hull, husk, shuck; scale; slough (of a snake)
قشري qišrī scaly, scurfy, scabrous, squamous; crustaceous │ القشرية االكزيما psoriasis (med.); O القشرية الحيوانات (ḥayawānāt) crustaceans
تقشير taqšīr peeling, paring, shelling; derinding, barking; skinning; scaling;
shaving off, scraping off; husking, shucking
قشط qašaṭa i (qašṭ) to take off, strip (off), remove (ھ عن s.th. from); to skim (ھ cream); to scratch off, scrape off, abrade ( ھ s.th.) II to take off (ھ s.th.); to strip off ( ھ s.th.); to rob (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), plunder, strip of his belongings (ه s.o.)


قشطة (eg.) qišṭa, (syr.) gašṭa cream; (eg.) sweetsop (Annona squamosa L.; bot.), custard apple
قشاط qišāṭ (leather) strap, thong; whiplash; drive belt, transmission belt
قشاط qušāṭ (eg.) pl. -āt jetton. chip, counter; piece, man (checkers, backgammon)
O مقشط miqšaṭ pl. مقاشط maqāšiṭ  eraser, erasing knife
maqāšiṭ  مقاشط pl. miqšaṭa مقشطة O
milling machine, miller 764
قشع qaša‘a a (qaš‘) to scatter, disperse, drive away, chase away (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), dispel (ھ s.th.) IV to scatter, disperse, drive away, chase away (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), dispel ( ھ s.th.); to scatter, disperse, break up (crowd), lift, dissolve (clouds, darkness) V and VII to be scattered, be dispersed, be driven away, be chased away; to scatter,
 disperse, break up (crowd),

lift, dissolve (clouds, darkness) (قشعر) IV اقشعر iqša‘'amJ to Ibudder, lhiver,
tremble. quake. Ihake, bave gooae s..b (witb cold. witb fright) I')":I .:.. ~ •.;.
("I~)'I or) la,'"" laqla"""" m,,,",,
I-;tdud"
a bloodcurdling thing. a borrible. ghastly thing
'J..~ quk{rira shudder, tremor, trembling. Ibakos; lhiver(ing); ague
~ qaI'am pl. ~L.:; qaAa'im' lion I ~ rl
"mm q. byena; calamity, disaster
قشف qašifa a (qašaf) and qašufa u (قشافة qašafa) to live in squalor and misery; to have a dirty skin; to pay no attention to cleanliness II (eg.) to become rough and chapped, to chap (hands) V = I; to lead an ascetic life, mortify the bodily appetites; (eg.) to become rough and chapped, to chap (skin)
قشفة qišfa (eg.) pl. قشف qišaf crust (of bread)
تقشف taqaššuf asceticism, mortification of the flesh; simple, primitive way of life
متقشف mutaqaššif ascetic(al); (eg.) roughened, chapped (hands); المتقشفة al- mutaqaššifa the ascetics
قشقش qašqaša to cure (ه من s.o. of scabies, of smallpox); to sweep out, sweep away (ھ s.th.)
 قشل qašila (qašal) (eg.) to be poor, penniless, without means
 قشلة (Turk. kışla) qašla pl. قشل qišal (military) barracks (syr.); hospital (eg.)
قشالق (Turk. kışlak) qušlāq pl. -āt (military) barracks
قشمش qišmiš a variety of currants (= seedless raisins)
قاشاني look up alphabetically
قص qaṣṣa u (qaṣṣ) to cut, cut off, clip (ھ s.th.); to shear, shear off (ھ s.th.); to trim, curtail, dock, crop, lop (ھ s.th.); -- (qaṣṣ, قصص qaṣaṣ): اثره قص (atarahū) to follow s.o.’s tracks, track s.o.; (قصص qaṣas) to relate, narrate, tell (على ھ to s.o. s.th.) II to out off, shear off, clip, curtail, dock, trim, crop, lop (ھ s.th.) III to retaliate (ه upon s.o.), return like for like (ه to s.o.); to avenge o.s., revenge o.s., take vengeance ( ه on s.o.); to punish, castigate, chastise (ه s.o.); (com.) to settle accounts (ه with s.o.); to be quits, be even (ه with s.o.) V اثره (atarahū) to follow s.o.’s tracks, track s.o. VIII = V; to tell accurately, relate exactly (ھ s.th.); to retaliate (من upon s.o.), return like for like (من to s.o.); to avenge o.s., revenge o.s., take vengeance (من on s.o.); to punish, castigate, chastise (من s.o.)
قص clippings, outings, chips, snips, shreds, scraps; sternum, breastbone
qiṣāṣ قصاص quṣaṣ, قصص pl. quṣṣa قصة
forelock; lock of hair
قصة qiṣṣa manner of cutting; cut; (pl. قصص qiṣaṣ) narrative, tale, story │ ھذا قصة ان الشيء the matter is so that ..., the thing is best described by saying that ...
قصص qaṣaṣ clippings, cuttings, chips, snips, shreds, narrative, tale, story
قصصي qiṣaṣī, qaṣaṣī narrative, epic(al); (pl. قصصيون) storyteller, writer of fiction,
 novelist, romancer │ القصصي الشعر (ši‘r) epic poetry 765
قصاصة quṣāṣa (coll. قصاص quṣāṣ, and قصاصة quṣāṣa) pl. -āt cutting, chip, snip, shred; scrap (of paper); slip (of paper); (newspaper) clipping
قصاص qaṣṣāṣ shearer; tracker, tracer of tracks; writer of fiction, novelist, romancer
aqāṣīṣ  اقاصيص pl. uqṣūṣa اقصوصة
narrative, tale, novella, novel; short story
مقص miqaṣṣ pl. مقاص maqāṣ (pair of) scissors, (pair of) shears; (syr.) springs (of an automobile, of a coach) │ مقص ابو abū
m. earwig; skimmer, scissorbill (Rhynchops; zool.)
قصاص qiṣāṣ requital, reprisal, retaliation; punishment, castigation, chastisement; accounting, clearing, settlement of accounts
مقاصة muqāṣṣa accounting, clearing, settlement of accounts; balancing, adjustment, set off; compensation (com.)
│ المقاصة غرفة gurfat al-m. clearing house (fin.)
maqāṣīṣ  مقاصيص pl. maqṣūṣ مقصوص
(eg.) lovelock, earlock
مقصوصة maqṣūṣa skimming ladle, skimmer
قصاج quṣāj pl. -āt pliers, pincers, nippers
قصب qaṣaba i (qaṣb) to out up, carve up (ھ a slaughtered animal) II to curl (ھ the hair); to brocade, embroider with gold and silver thread (ھ s.th.)
قصب qaṣab (coll.) cane(s), reed(s); sugar cane; stalks (of cereal grasses); gold and silver thread, gold and silver
embroidery; brocade │ الذھب قصب q. ad-dahab gold brocade; السكر قصب q. as- sukkar sugar cane; الھندي القصب (hindī) bamboo; والغلب) السبق قصب احرز) aḥraza qaṣaba s-sabq (wa-l-galb) to come through with flying colors, carry the day, score a great success
قصبة qaṣaba (n. un.) pl. -āt cane, reed; pipe, tube; pipestem, pipe tube; writing pen; windpipe, trachea; shaft (of a well); a wind instrument resembling the reed pipe;
kassabah, a linear measure (Eg. = 3.55 m); citadel; capital city, metropolis │ قصبة الرئة q. ar-ri’a windpipe, trachea; قصبة المريء q. al-marī’ gullet, esophagus
قصابة qaṣāba butcher’s trade, butchery
قصيبة quṣaiba (tun.) oats
قصاب qaṣṣāb butcher, slaughterer; (eg.) land surveyor
قصابة qaṣāba (reed) pipe
مقصب muqaṣṣab embroidered with gold and silver thread, brocaded, trimmed with brocade
قصاج look up alphabetically
قصد qaṣada i (qaṣd) to go or proceed straightaway (الى or ه ھ، to s.o., to s.th.), make a beeline (الى or ه ھ، for), walk up to
s.o. or s.th. (الى or ھ .); to go to see (ه الى، s.o.), call (ه الى، on s.o.); to betake o.s., repair, go (ه الى، to a place; ه الى، to s.o.), be headed, be bound (ه الى، for a place); to seek, pursue (ھ الى، s.th.), strive (ھ الى، for), aspire (ھ الى، to), intend, have in mind (ھ الى، s.th.; من or ھ ب s.th. with s.th. else); to aim (ھ الى، at s.th.); to have in view, contemplate, consider, purpose (ھ s.th.); to mean, try to say (ب ھ or من by s.th. s.th.); to adopt a middle course (في in, at); to be economical, frugal, thrifty, provident; to economize, save │ قصده قصد (qaṣdahū) to walk up to s.o., go toward s.o.; to follow, imitate s.o. IV to induce to go (الى to s.o., to a place; ه s.o.); to compose kasidas V to be broken, break; (eg.) to be angry (ه with s.o.), be mad (ه at s.o.) VII to be broken, break VIII to adopt a middle course (في in, at; بين between); to assume a mediatory position (بين   between), act as mediator; to be economical, frugal, thrifty, 766 provident, economize (في with); to save (ھ money, etc.); to compose kasidas
قصد qaṣd endeavor, aspiration, intention, intent; design, purpose, resolution; object, goal, aim, end; frugality; thrift, economy │ قصدا qaṣdan, قصد عن intentionally, purposely, advisedly, on purpose; deliberately; قصد غير عن unintentionally, inadvertently; القصد حسن ḥusn al.q. good intention; القصد سوء sū’ al-
q. evil intention قصدك ھو (qaṣdaka,
 qaṣduka) he is in front of you, before you, opposite you
قصدي qaṣdī intentional; intended
قصاد quṣād (prep.) in front of, before, opposite (eg.)
قصيد qaṣīd aspired, desired, aimed at, intended; faultless, without defects (of a poem); also = القصيد بيت │ قصيدة bait al-q. (the essential, principal verse of the kasida, i.e.) the main point, the principal part, the essence, the core, the gist, the hest, the hit, the climax of s.th., that which stands out from the rest, the right thing
قصيدة qaṣīda pl. قصائد qaṣā’id  kasida, an ancient Arabic poem having, as a rule, a rigid tripartite structure) │ = القصيدة بيت القصيد بيت, see under قصيد
اقصد aqṣad  directer, directest
مقصد maqṣad pl. مقاصد maqāṣid  (place of) destination; intention, intent; design, purpose, resolution; object, goal, aim, end; sense, meaning, import, purport, significance │ المقاصد سيئ sayyi’ al-m. malevolent, malicious
اقتصاد iqtiṣād saving, economization, retrenchment; thriftiness, thrift, providence; economy │ االقتصاد علم ‘ilm al-iqt., (السياسي االقتصاد (علم (siyāsī) economics, political economy; في اقتصادا الوقت iqtiṣādan fī l-waqt in order to save time
اقتصادي iqtiṣādī economical; saving, thrifty, provident; economic; economist, political economist; االقتصاديات the economy
قاصد qāṣid direct, straight (way); easy, smooth, pleasant, short (of travel) │ قاصد رسولي (rasūlī) (pl. قصاد quṣṣād) apostolic delegate
رسولية قصادة qiṣāda rasūlīya papal legation
مقصود maqṣūd aimed at, intended; intentional, designed, deliberate; meant
قصدير qaṣdīr tin
 قصر qaṣura u (qiṣar, qaṣr, قصارة qaṣāra) to be or become short, too short, or shorter; to be insufficient, be inadequate; -- qaṣara u (قصور quṣūr) to miss, fail to reach (عن
s.th., e.g., a target), fall short (عن of); to he incapable (عن of), he unable (عن to do s.th.), fail to reach, attain, accomplish, or achieve (عن s.th.); not to he equal (عن to s.th.), not to be up to s.th. (عن), he unable to cope with s.th. (عن); to desist, cease, refrain, abstain (عن from); -- qaṣara i u (qaṣr) to make short or shorter, shorten, cut short, curtail, abridge, reduce, lessen ( ھ s.th.); -- qaṣara u (qaṣr) to hold hack, restrain, check, curb (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to keep under supervision or control (ه ھ، s.o., s.h.); to lock up (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to limit, restrict, confine (ه ھ، على s.o., s.th. to); -- qaṣara u (qaṣr, قصارة qiṣāara) to full, whiten, bleach, blanch (ھ s.th.) II to make short or shorter, shorten, cut short, curtail, abridge, reduce, lessen (ھ s.th.); to miss, fail to reach (عن s.th., e.g., a target), fall short (عن of); to he incapable (عن of), be unable (عن to do s.th.); to fail to accomplish, achieve, reach, or attain (عن s.th.); not to be equal (عن to s.th.), not to he up to s.th. (عن), he unable to cope with s.th. (عن); to be 767 inadequate, insufficient, inferior; to be remise (في in, at, in some work), be derelict (في to), fall behind, lag behind (في in); to be negligent, careless; to be in, negligent, neglectful (في in), neglect (في s.th.); to desist, cease, refrain, abstain (عن from) │ يقصر لم he spared no pains or expense in or with ..., he left nothing undone to ..., he did not fail to ... IV to make short or shorter, shorten, cut short, curtail, abridge, reduce, lessen (ھ s.th.); to desist, cease, refrain, abstain (عن from) VI to contract, shrink, dwindle, become smaller; to be incapable (عن of); to desist, cease (عنfrom); to refrain. abstain (عن from) VIII to limit o.s., restrict o.s., confine o.s., be limited, restricted, or confined (على to); to content o.s., be content (على with) X to find short, regard as deficient or inadequate (ھ s.th.)
قصر qaṣr shortness, brevity; smallness; incapability, inability; insufficiency, inadequacy; laxity, slackness, negligence, neglectfulness; indolence, inertness, laziness; shortening, curtailment, abridgment, reduction, diminution; limitation, restriction. confinement (على to); theutmost that is in s.o.’s power, e.g., ھذا تفعل ان قصرك (qaṣruka) the most you
 can hope to accomplish is to do this; you must limit yourself to doing this
قصر qaṣr pl. قصور quṣū castle; palace; palais │ العدلية قصر q. al-‘adlīya (Mor.) palace of justice, courthouse
قصرية qaṣrīya pl. قصار qaṣārin pot; flowerpot; chamber pot
قصر qiṣar shortness, brevity; smallness
│ النظر قصر q. an-naẓar nearsightedness, shortsightedness
قصر qaṣr slackness, laxity, negligence, neglectfulness; indolence, inertness, laziness
قصارك ان تفعل ھذا = quṣār: qaṣār, قصار )قصارى (see قصاراك ان تفعل ھذا
قصار qaṣṣār fuller, bleacher
قصور quṣūr incapability, inability; insufficiency, inadequacy; deficiency, shortcoming, lack; reduction, diminution, decrease; slackness, laxity, negligence, neglectfulness; indolence, inertness, laziness; legal minority, nonage │ قصور الباع powerlessness, impotence, helplessness, weakness, incapability, inability (عن of, to do s.th.)
قصير qaṣīr pl. قصار qiṣār short; small, short (of stature), low │ األجل قصير q. al- ajal short-term(ed), short-dated, short- lived; الباع قصير powerless, impotent, helpless, weak, incapable, unable; parsimonious, niggardly; اليد قصير q. al- yad do.
قصارة qiṣāra trade of the fuller or bleacher
قصارى quṣārā the utmost, the limit (ه) s.o.’s power) │ كذا تفعل ان قصاراك (quṣārāka) the most you can accomplish is to do this; you must limit yourself to doing this; قصاراه بذل or الجھد قصارى بذل (q. l-jahd) to exert every conceivable effort (ل to, in order to; ب on, for), go to great lengths, go out of one’s way, do one’s best, do all in one’s power, leave no stone untamed (ل to, in order to); األمر قصارى q.
l-amr, القول قصارى q. l-qaul in short, in brief, to make a long story short
اقصر aqṣar  shorter
االقصر al-aqṣur Luxor (town in Upper Egypt)
تقصير taqṣīr shortening, curtailment, abridgment, reduction, diminution, limitation, restriction, confinement; incapability, incapacity, inability; insufficiency, inadequacy, inferiority; neglect, dereliction (في of ), remissness (في in); slackness, laxity, negligence, 768 neglectfullness; defect, fault, failing, deficiency, shortcoming
قاصر qāṣir incapable (عن of), unable ( عن to do s.th.); limited, restricted, confined (على to); reserved (على for); intransitive (gram.); (pl. -ūn, قصر quṣṣar) legally minor, under age; a legal minor │ الطرف قاصرة q. aṭ-ṭarf (of a woman)
chaste-eyed, chaste, demure, modest; قاصر اليد q. al-yad powerless, impotent, helpless, weak, incapable, unable; parsimonious, niggardly
مقصور maqṣūr confined (على to); restricted, limited │ الطرف مقصورة m. aṭ- ṭarf
(woman) chaste-eyed, chaste, demure, modest; مقصورة الف (alif) the alif that can be shortened, i.e., final ى, pronounced -ā (e.g., رمى ramā) and ا, without following hamza (gram.)
مقصورة maqṣūra pl. -āt, مقاصير maqāṣīr  palace; cabinet, closet; compartment; box or stall in a mosque near the mihrab, reserved for the ruler; (theater, cinema) box, log.; the detached portion of a mosque set aside for the communal prayer, and frequently enclosing the tomb of the patron saint; (prisoner’s) dock; chapel (in a church)
مقصر muqaṣṣir slack, negligent, neglectful
مقتصر muqtaṣir limited, restricted, confined (على to)
مقتصر muqtaṣar short, brief, concise, terse, succinct, summary
قيصر look up alphabetically
قصع qaṣa‘a a (qaṣ‘) to drink in avid gulps, gulp down, pour down, toss down (ھ water); to slake quench (ھ the thirst); to
 grind, crush. bruise, squash, mash (ھ (s.th.)
قصعة qaṣ‘a pl. qaṣa‘āt, قصع qiṣa‘, قصاع qiṣā‘ large bowl (made of wood or copper); (ir.) kettle
قصف qaṣafa i (qaṣf) to break, shatter, smash (ھ s.th.); to beset, harass, press hard, oppress (ه s.o.), bear down (ه upon s.o.); to bomb (ه s.th.); to thunder, roar (esp., of cannon); to roll, rumble, grumble, peal (of thunder); -- u (qaṣf, قصوف quṣūf) to feast, revel, carouse; to lead a life of opulence; -- qaṣifa a (qaṣaf) to break; to be frail, delicate, brittle, fragile V and VII to be broken, break, snap
قصف qaṣf thunder, roar (e.g., of cannon); revelry, carousal
قصف qaṣif frail, delicate, brittle, fragile; broken
قصيف qaṣīf frail, delicate, brittle, fragile; broken
قصوف quṣūf revelry, carousal
مقصف maqṣaf pl. مقاصف maqāṣif  refreshment room; post exchange, canteen; casino; bar; buffet, refreshment counter
قصقص qaṣqaṣa to break, shatter (ھ s.th.); (eg.) to snip off the ends (ھ of s.th.), clip, trim, crop (ھ s.th.)
قصل qaṣala i (qaṣl) to cut off, mow (off) (ھ s.th.) VIII to cut off (ھ s.th.)
قصل qaṣal chaff, husks, shucks, awns (of grain); (n. un. ة) stalks
قصال qaṣṣāl sharp, cutting, sharp- pointed
قصيل qaṣīl (eg.) winter barley
مقصل miqṣal sharp, cutting, sharp- pointed
O مقصلة miqṣala pl. -āt, مقاصل maqāṣil 
guillotine
قاصل qāṣil sharp, cutting
قصم qaṣama i (qaṣm) to break, shatter (ھ s.th.)
│ ظھره قصم (ẓahrahū) (to break s.o.’s back
=) to be a mortal blow to s.o. V to be broken, break, snap VII = V 769
قصم qaṣim easily broken, brittle, fragile
قصيم qaṣīm easily broken, brittle, fragile
قاصم qāṣim pl. قواصم qawāṣim  breaking
│ الظھر قاصمة qāṣimat aẓ-ẓahr mortal blow, catastrophe, disaster; قواصم ضربات (ḍarabat) mortal blows, crushing blows
(قصو and قصا (قصي qaṣā u (قصو qaṣw, quṣuw, قصاء qaṣā’) and قصي qaṣiya a (قصا، قصى qaṣan) to be far away, be far removed, be at a great distance (عن from), be remote, distant; to go far away (عن from) IV to take far away, send far away ( ه عن s.o., s.th. from); to remove (ه عن s.o. from); to drive away (ه عن s.o. from); to drag away (ه عن s.o. from); to dismiss (ه s.o., الخدمة عن from a job); to reach the utmost limit (ھ of s.th.) │ البصر يقصيه ال lā yuqṣīhi l-baṣaru out of sight, not within view, invisible V to go far away (عن from); to penetrate deeply, inquire (ھ into a problem, and the like), examine, study, investigate (ھ s.th.), go to the root (0 of s.th.); to follow out, follow to a. conclusion (ھ s.th.); to examine, feel out, palpate (ھ s.th.) X to penetrate deeply, inquire (ھ into a problem, and the like), examine, study, investigate (ھ s.th.), go to the root (ھ of s.th.); to inquire, make inquiries (عن about)
قصا qaṣan and قصاء qaṣā’ distance, remoteness
قصي qaṣīy pl. اقصاء aqṣā’ far (away), distant, remote
اقصى aqṣā, f. قصوى quṣwā, pl. اقاص aqāṣin more distant, remoter, farther (away);
most distant, remotest, farthest; utmost, extreme, ultimate; maximal, maximum; the farthermost part; the utmost, extreme, extremity; end │ األقصى المسجد (masjid) name of a mosque on the Temple Square in Jerusalem; األقصى الشرق (šarq) the Far East; األقصى المغرب (magrib) (the extreme west =) Morocco; من القصوى الغاية the utmost degree of, the maximum of; اقاصي األرض aqāsī l-arḍ the remotest parts of the earth, the ends of the world; الضرورة عند القصوى (ḍarūra) in case of dire necessity, when worst comes to worst; حد اقصى الى
 aqṣā ḥaddin to the extreme limit, to the utmost; as far as possible; اقصاه الى اقصاه من or اقصاه الى ادناه من (adnāhu) from one end to the other, throughout, everything without exception
تقص taqaṣṣin thorough examination, close study, minute investigation
استقصاء istiqṣā’ thorough examination, close study, minute investigation; inquiry (عن about)
قاص qāṣin pl. قاصون qāṣūn, اقصاء aqṣā’ distant, remote, far (away) │ والدانى القاصى (lit.: the distant one and the near one =) everybody, all people; والدانية القاصية في near and far
قض qaḍḍa u (qaḍḍ) to pierce, bore, perforate (ھ s.th.); to break into pieces, crush, bray, bruise, pulverize (ھ s.th.); to tear down, demolish (ھ a wall); to pull out. tear out (ھ a peg or stake); -- a (قضض qaḍaḍ) to be rough, crude, hard (bed) IV to be rough, crude, hard (bed); to make rough, crude or hard (ھ the bed) │ اقض مضجعه (maḍja‘ahū) or المضجع عليه اقض to rob s.o.’s sleep VII to swoop down, pounce down, dive down, descend; to strike (على s.th.; of lightning); to pounce, fall, rush, hurl o.s. (على upon), storm, rush (على against), charge, attack, assail (على s.o.); to be broken, cracked, threaten to collapse; to fall, tumble
قض qaḍḍ (coll.) pebbles; gravel │ جاء قضھم القوم jā’a l-qaumu qaḍḍuhum (qaḍḍahum) all the people came
قضة qiḍḍa pebbles; gravel 770
جاء القوم │ gravel pebbles; qaḍīḍ قضيض people the all (qaum) )قضيضھم )بقضيضھم came
انقضاض inqiḍāḍ swooping down, pouncing down, dive, downrush; onrush, onslaught, storm, assault │ االنقضاض مدفع midfa‘ al-inq. (pl. مدافع madāfi‘) self- propelled assault gun (mil.); االنقضاض طائرة dive bomber
منقضة طائرة ṭā’ira munqaḍḍa dive bomber
قضب qaḍaba i (qaḍb) to cut off (ھ s.th.); to lop, prone, trim (ھ trees) II = I; VIII = I; to abridge (ھ s.th.), give a condensed
extract, make a digest (ھ of s.th.); to extemporize, improvise (ھ s.th.), quote extempore (ھ verses, and the like), deliver offhand (ھ a speech)
قضب qaḍb edible herbs
قضيب qaḍīb pl. قضبان qaḍbān cut-off branch, twig, switch; stick, rod, staff,
wand; bar (of a grate); male organ of generation, penis, phallus; rail (railroad); guide, guide rail, guideway (tehn.)
قضابة qaḍāba that which is lopped or out off; lops, prunings, trimmings (of trees)
مقضب miqḍab pruning hook; pruning shears, pruning knife
اقتضاب iqtiḍāb abridgment; digest; extract; conciseness, terseness, brevity; improvisation
مقتضب muqtaḍab short, brief, concise, terse; improvised, extemporaneous, offhand, unprepared; المقتضب name of a poetic meter; pl. مقتضبات short news items, news in brief (journ.)
قضع qaḍ‘ gripes, colic
قضاع quḍā‘ gripes, colic
قضف qaḍufa u to be or become slender, slim, thin, narrow
قضم qaḍma a and qaḍama i (qaḍm) to gnaw (ھ s.th., on s.th.); to nibble (ھ s.th., at s.th.)
قضامة (pronounced qḍāme; syr.) roasted and salted chick-peas; assorted nuts, peanuts, pistachios, etc.; birdseed
al- al-ḥayawānāt الحيوانات القاضمة rodents the qāḍima
قضى qaḍā i (قضاء qaḍā’) to settle (ھ s.th.); to finish, terminate, conclude, end, close, wind up, complete, consummate, accomplish, achieve (ھ s.th.); to carry out, execute, perform, effectuate (ھ s.th.); to fulfill (ھ a request), comply (ھ with); to do, perform (ھ one’s duty); to gratify (ھ a wish), provide (ھ for a need), satisfy, meet, answer, discharge (ھ a demand, a claim); to pay, settle (ھ a debt); to spend, pass (ھ time); to die (= اجله قضى); to fix, appoint, determine, decree, decide, rule (ب s.th., بان that); (of God) to foreordain,
 predestine; to judge, act as judge, decide judicially (بين between two litigants); to pass or pronounce judgment (ل in favor of s.o.; على against s.o.); to sentence, condemn (على ب s.o. to), impose, inflict (ب على upon s.o. a penalty); to impose or enjoin as a duty (على ب upon s.o. s.th.); to make necessary or requisite (على ب for s.o. s.th.), require s.o. (على) to do s.th. (ب), compel, force (على s.o. ب to do s.th.); to demand, require, necessitate (ب s.th.), call for s.th. (ب); to root out, extirpate, annihilate, exterminate (على s.o., s.th.); to kill, do in (على s.o.), do away (على with s.o., with s.th.), put an end (على to s.th.); to thwart, foil, frustrate (على s.th.) │ اجله قضى (ajalahū) to pass away, die; من العجب قضى (‘ajaba) to be full of amazement at, be very astonished at; نحبه قضى (naḥbahū) to fulfill one’s vow; to pass away, die; قضى وطره (waṭarahū) to attain one’s aim or end, see one’s wish fulfilled; األمر قضى ١٧٧ quḍiya l-amru the matter is decided and done with, the die is cast; امره قضي quḍiya amruhū and عليه قضي quḍiya ‘alaihi it’s all over with him, he’s a goner II to carry out, execute, perform, effectuate (ھ s.th.) III to summon before a judge, bring before a court of justice, arraign (ه s.o.); to prosecute, sue (ه s.o.), take legal action, bring suit (ه against s.o.); to demand (ه ب from s.o. payment of s.th.), call in (ه ب from s.o. s.th.) V to be finished, completed; to peas, go by, elapse, expire, run out (time) VI to litigate, carry on a lawsuit; to demand (ھ s.th.; ھ من or ه from s.o. payment of s.th.; from s.o. s.th.), call in (ھ s.th., من or ه from s.o.), claim (على ھ for s.th. remuneration), lay claim (ھ to s.th.); to get, receive (ه ھ from s.o. s.th., also من ھ s.th. from, esp. money owed, emolument) VII to be completed, be finished, be done, be terminated, be concluded, come to an end, cease, stop; to pass, go by, elapse, expire, run out (time); to have expired, have elapsed, be over, be peat (time) VIII to demand, claim, exact, require (ه ھ from
s.o. s.th.); to make necessary, make requisite, necessitate, require (ھ s.th.) X to demand, claim, exact, require (ه ھ from
s.o. s.th.)
قضى qaḍan judgment, sentence, (judicial) decision, (court) ruling
قضاء qaḍā’ settling, finishing, ending, closing, termination, conclusion, windup, completion, accomplishment; carrying out, execution, performance, effectuation; fulfillment, satisfaction, gratification (of a wish, of a desire); provision (for a need); compliance (with a request); payment, settlement, discharge (of a debt); passing, spending (of a period of time); divine decree, destiny, fate; judgment, sentence, (judicial) decision, (court) ruling, ordinance; administration of the law, judiciary, jurisprudence, justice; law; jurisdiction; office of judge, judge, ship, judicature; judging, rendering of judgment; sentencing, condemnation (على of s.o.); extermination, annihilation, extirpation (على of s.o., of s.th.), killing ( على of s.o.), thwarting, foiling frustration
(على of s.th.); -- (pl. اقضية aqḍiya) district, province (Syr., Ir., Leb., Saudi Ar., Yemen) │ ﷲ قضاء death; الشرعي القضاء (šar‘ī) jurisdiction based on the Sharia; canonical law, Sharia law; القضاء دار court of justice, tribunal; اإلداري القضاء محكمة maḥkmat al-q. al-idārī administrative court; والقدر القضاء (wa-l-qadar) fate and divine decree; والقدر بالقضاء (or وقدرا قضاء qaḍā’an wa-qadaran) by fate and divine decree; القضاء قضي (quḍiya) the divine decree was fulfilled, i.e., death came with God’s will
قضائي qaḍā’ī judicial, judicatory; forensic, legal, judiciary, pertaining to courts of justice │ قضائي حارس pl. حراس قضائيون (ḥurrās) legally appointed trustee or administrator, receiver in bankruptcy, liquidator, sequestrator
aṣ-ṣulḥ qaḍawīyat قضوية الصلح
jurisdiction of a justice of the peace
قضية qaḍīya pl. قضايا qaḍāyā lawsuit; litigation, judicial contest; action at law, suit; (legal) case, cause, legal affair; matter, affair; question, problem, issue; theorem, proposition (math.)
مقاضاة muqāḍāh trial, hearing
انقضاء inqiḍā’ passing, elapsing, termination, expiry, expiration, end (of a
 period of time); extinction (of an obligation)
اقتضاء iqtiḍā’ necessity, need, exigency, requirement │ االقتضاء عند in case of need, if need be, when necessary
قاض qāḍin decisive, conclusive; deadly, lethal; (pl. قضاة quḍāh) judge, magistrate, justice, cadi; pl. قواض qawāḍin 772 requirements, exigencies │ قاض سم (samm) deadly poison; قاضية ضربة (ḍarba) decisive blow (على against); knockout (boxing); mortal or crushing blow, deathblow (على to); ان الذمة قواضى من رأى (q. d-dimma) to regard it u one’s duty to ...; البحث قاضي q.
l-baḥt (Tun.) examining magistrate; قاضي التحقيق (Eg.) examining magistrate; قاضي اإلحالة q. l-iḥāla (Eg.) magistrate sitting at defendant’s arraignment, trial judge; قاضي الصلح q. ṣ-ṣulḥ justice of the peace
مقضي maqḍīy settled, finished, done, completed, accomplished, etc. │ األمر المقضي accomplished fact, fait accompli
متقاض mutaqāḍin pl. متقاضون mutaqāḍūn litigant; المتقاضيان al- mutaqāḍiyān the two litigants
متقاضى mutaqāḍan subject to legal prosecution
مقتضى muqtaḍan required, necessary, requisite; (pl. مقتضيات muqtaḍayāt) requirement, exigency, necessity, need │ بمقتضى bi-muqtaḍā (prep.) according to, in accordance with, in conformity with, pursuant to, under; األحوال مقتضيات عند should the circumstances require it
 قط qaṭṭu (chiefly with the put tense in negative sentences) ever, (neg.:) never
  قطqaṭṭa u (qaṭṭ) to carve (ھ s.th.); to cut, trim, clip, pare (ھ s.th.); to mend the point (ھ of a pen), nib, sharpen (ھ a pen) II to carve, turn (ھ wood) VIII to sharpen, nib ( ھ a pen)
قط qaṭṭ short and curly (hair)
قطاط qaṭṭāṭ turner
 قط qiṭṭ pl. قطط qiṭaṭ, قطاط qiṭāṭ, قططة qiṭaṭa male cat, tomcat │ الزباد قط q. az-zabād civet cat
قطة qiṭṭa female cat
قطيطة quṭaiṭa kitten
قطب qaṭaba i (qaṭb) to gather, collect (ھ s.th.);
-- (qaṭb, قطوب quṭūb) to contract the eyebrows (also حاجبيه قطب q. ḥājibaihi), knit the brows, frown, scowl, glower │ جبينه قطب (jabīnahū) to frown II to scowl, glower; to knit the brows, frown; (eg.) to sew together (ھ s.th.) V to become gloomy (countenance) X O to polarize (ھ s.th.; phys.)
قطب quṭb pl. اقطاب aqṭāb axis, axle; pole (astron., geogr., el.); pivot; leader; authority, leading personality, celebrity (chiefly used in the pl.) │ الرحى قطب q. ar- raḥā pivot (of s.th.; fig.); الجنوبي القطب (janūbī) the South Pole; الشمالي القطب (šamālī) the North Pole; سالب قطب negative pole; cathode, موجب قطب (mūjab) positive pole, anode
(šafaq) الشفق القطبي O │ polar quṭbī قطبي light polar
قطبة quṭba (eg.) stitch (in sowing)
قطوب quṭūb frowning, scowling, glowering
O استقطاب istiqṭāb polarization (phys.)
قاطبة qāṭibatan all together, all without exception, one and all
قطر qaṭara u (qaṭr, قطران qaṭarān) to fall or sow in drops, drip, dribble, trickle II (qaṭr) to let fall or sow in drops, drip, drop, dribble, infuse in drops or driblets (ھ s.th.); to filter, filtrate (ھ s.th.); to refine ( ھ s.th.); to distill (ھ s.th.); to line up camels (ھ) in single file and connect them with halters, form a train of camels; to couple (ھ vehicles); to tow, tug (ھ a ship) V to fall or sow in drops, drip, dribble, trickle; to soak, percolate (الى into), trickle (الى in) VI to come in successive groups, to crowd, throng, flock (الى or على to s.o., to a place) X to drip, drop, dribble (ھ s.th.); to distill, extract by distillation (ھ s.th.) 773
قطر qaṭr dripping, dribbling, dribble, trickling, trickle; (call.; n. un. ة) pl. قطار qiṭār drops, driblets; rain; -- sirup
قطر qaṭr pl. قطورات quṭūrāt (eg.) (railroad) train
قطرجي (eg.) qaṭargī pl. -īya shunter, switchman (railroad)
 قطر quṭr pl. اقطار aqṭār region, quarter; district, section; tract of land; zone; country, land; diameter (of a circle); diagonal; caliber, bore (of a tube) │ القطر المصري (miṣrī) Egypt; الدائرة قطر نصف niṣf
q. ad-d. radius (of the circle); اقطار اربعة الدنيا arba‘at a. ad-dunyā the four quarters of the world; جميع من تأخذني التي الروعة اقطاري (rau‘a) the rapture which holds me completely enthralled, which pervades my heart through and through
قطري quṭrī regional; diametral, diametrical
قطر qaṭar  Qatar (sheikdom in eastern Arabia)
قطر quṭr, quṭur agalloch, aloeswood
قطرة qaṭra (n. un. of قطر qaṭr) pl.
qaṭarāt drop (also as a medicine)
قطيرة quṭaira pl. -āt droplet, driblet
قطار qiṭār pl. -āt, قطر quṭur, قطرات quṭurāt train of camels; (railroad) train; railroad; single file (of soldiers; Eg., mil.)
│ البضاعة قطار freight train, goods train; حديدي قطار (ḥadīdī) railroad train; (خصوصي or خاص قطار (خصوص (kāṣṣ, kuṣūṣī) special train; الركاب قطار q. ar-rukkāb passenger train; سباق قطار (sabbāq) fast train, express train; سريع قطار express train; وقاف قطار (waqqāf) local train
قطارة qaṭṭāra dropping tube, pipette, dropper
قطران qaṭrān (qiṭrān, qaṭirān) tar
مقطر miqṭar pl. مقاطر maqāṭir  censer
مقطرة miqṭara pl. مقاطر maqāṭir  censer; stocks (device for punishment)
تقطير taqṭīr filtering, filtration; refining; distilling, distillation
استقطار istiqṭār distilling, distillation
قاطرة qāṭira pl. -āt locomotive; rail car, diesel
مقطورات maqṭūrāt trailers, truck trailers
مقطرات muqaṭṭarāt spirituous liquors, spirits
قطرميز qaṭramīz (large) glass bottle or jar
قطرن qaṭrana to tar, smear or coat with tar (ھ s.th.)
قطران qaṭrān (qiṭrān, qaṭirān) tar
قطع qaṭa‘a a (qaṭ‘) to cut (ھ s.th.); to cut off (ھ s.th.); to chop off, lop off (ھ s.th.); to amputate (ھ s.th.); to cut through, cut in two, divide (ھ s.th.); to tear apart, disrupt, sunder, disjoin, separate (ھ s.th.); to fell (ھ a tree); to break off, sever (ھ s.th., e.g., relations); to break off one’s friendship, break (ه with s.o.); to cut, snub (ه s.o.); to interrupt (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to cut short, interrupt, silence (ه s.o.); to turn off, switch off, disconnect (ھ electric current); to prevent, hinder (ه عن s.o. from); to forbid (ه to s.o. s.th.), prohibit (ه عن s.o. from doing s.th.); to deprive (ه عن s.o. of); (Chr.) to excommunicate (ه s.o.); to have a profound effect, have a considerable impact, be impressive (spiritually); to make a profound impression (في on), impress greatly, affect deeply (في s.o.); to ford (ھ a river), cross (ھ a river, an ocean), traverse (ھ a country), pass through or across s.th. (ھ); to cover (ھ a distance); to survive (ھ s.th., e.g., a danger), surmount, overcome (ھ s.th., e.g., a difficulty), get over s.th. (ھ); to spend, pass, while away (ھ في time with); to use up, consume (ھ food); to decide (ھ or ب s.th.); to say with 774 certainty, assert, declare positively (ب s.th.), affirm confidently, aver (بأن that); to prove (بأن that); pass. quṭi’a to break, break apart, be or get broken, be or become interrupted; to snap (rope, string of a musical instrument) │ الرجاء) األمل قطع) (amal, rajā’) to give up hope, to despair; الثمن قطع (taman) to fix the price, agree on the price; بطاقة) تذكرة قطع) (tadkiratan) to buy a ticket; حديثه عليه قطع (ḥadītahū) to interrupt s.o., cut s.o. short, cut in on s.o.’s talk; قطع دورا (dauran) to pass through a phase or period, go through a stage; برأي قطع (bi- ra’yin) to express a firm opinion; to decide in favor of an opinion; برأيه قطع (bi- ra’yihī) to be guided in one’s decisions by s.o., proceed in accordance with s.o.’s opinion or decision; الرحم قطع (raḥim) to sever the bonds of kinship, break with one’s relatives; to violate the rules of consanguinity; اشواطا قطع (ašwāṭan) to make progress; التقدم في (بعيدا) كبيرا شوطا قطع الرقي)) (šauṭan, taqaddum, ruqīy) and قطع اشواطا الرقي ميدان في (maidāni r-r.) to make
 great progress, make great headway; قطع الطريق عليه to cut off s.o.’s way, intercept s.o.; to engage in highway robbery; to waylay s.o.) commit highway robbery on s.o.; عقله يقطع ال (‘aqlahū) it won’t get into his head, he can’t understand or believe it; عھدا قطع (‘ahdan) to make a contract; to make a promise, vow, or pledge (ل to s.o.); ب عھدا نفسه على قطع (‘ahdan) and قطع ب نفسه على الوعد (wa‘da) to vow s.th., pledge o.s. or bind o.s. to do s.th.; قطع الكمبيالة to discount the bill of exchange; لسنه قطع (lisānahū) to silence s.o., seal s.o.’s lips, gag s.o.; الوقت قطع (waqt) to while away the time, kill time II to cut into pieces, cut up, dismember (ھ s.th.); to carve (ھ meat); to tear apart, rend, rip apart, gash. slash, lacerate (ھ s.th.); to cut seriously, gash deeply (ھ one’s hand); to interrupt; to scan (ھ a verse) │ البصر يقطع (qalba) heart-rending III to dissociate, separate o.s. (ه from), part company, break off one’s friendship, break (ه with s.o.); to cut, snub (ه s.o.); to be on bad terms (ه with s.o.); to boycott (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to
interrupt (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to cut s.o. (ه) short, out in on s.o.’s (ه) talk, also قاطع الحديث IV to make or let s.o. (ه) cut or cut off (ھ s.th.); to make or let s.o. (ه) cross or ford (ھ a river); to bestow as a fief (ه ھ on
s.o. s.th.); to grant, assign, allot (ه ھ to s.o. s.th.); to separate o.s., disassociate o.s. (ه from s.o.), part company (ه with s.o.); to break off one’s friendship (عن with s.o.); to break (عن with s.o.) V to be cut off, be severed, be disrupted, be interrupted, be disconnected; to snap; to be cut up, be chopped up, be hacked to pieces. be dismembered; to be intermittent. flow discontinuously (electric current); to be disjointed, be jerky (words, style); to knock o.s. out (e.g., with eagerness) │ الحبال به تقطعت (ḥibālu) to be at the end of one’s resources, be utterly helpless; به تقطع األسباب (asbābu) to be at one’s wit’s end, be at the end of one’s tether; دونه تتقطع ھدف األعناق (hadafun, dūnahū) lit.: a goal on the way to which throats are slit, i.e., one which remains unattainable VI to separate, part company, go apart; to get separated from each other; to break off mutual relations, snub each other; to intersect (lines, roads, etc.; L s.th.), cut across,
cross (of a line or road, مع another) VII to be cut off, be or get separated (عن or من from); to be chopped off, be lopped off, be cut through, be sundered, be severed, be tom apart, be disrupted, be broken, be broken off; to be interrupted, be disconnected, be cut off, be shut off (also, e.g., electric current), be blocked, be stopped; to 775 break. break apart, tear, snap (intr., e.g., a rope, a string); to cease, end, come to an end, run out, expire; to stop, come to a halt, come to a standstill, be suspended, be discontinued; to stop. cease (عن s.th.; doing s.th.); to leave off ( عن s.th.), desist, abstain. refrain (عن from); to suspend, discontinue, stay (عن s.th.); to withdraw, stay away, hold aloof (عن from); to devote o.s., dedicate o.s., give one’s attention. apply o.s. (ل or الى to); to concentrate (ل or الى on); to occupy o.s. exclusively (ل or الى with), give all one’s time (ل or الى to) VIII to take a part, a little (من of s.th.); to take, borrow, cull, glean ( ھ من s.th. from, e.g., a story from a book); to tear out, take out, remove (ھ e.g., a page, من from a book or notebook); to tear off, rip off, detach (ھ e.g., a coupon); to appropriate, acquire (ھ s.th.); to possess o.s., take possession (ھ of), seize (ھ on) X to request as a fief (ه ھ of S.o. s.th.); (eg.) to deduct (ھ an amount)
قطع qal’ cutting off; chopping off, detruncation; amputation; cutting, scission, section; disruption, sunderance, disjunction, disconnection, separation; felling (of a tree); severance, rupture, breakoff (e.g., of relations); stoppage, blockage, embargo, ban, blackout, suspension; interruption, discontinuation; disconnection, turning off, switching off (of electric current); prevention, hindrance (عن from); deprivation; excommunication (Chr.); fording (of a river); crossing (of an ocean); traversion (of a country); covering (of a distance); spending, passing (of a span of time); consumption; deduction, rebate, discount; (pl. اقطاع aqṭā‘) format, size (of a book); (pl. قطوع aqṭā‘) section (geom.); قطعا qaṭ‘an decidedly, definitely, positively, for certain; with neg.: absolutely not, not at all, by no means, not in the least │ الحسابات قطع settlement of accounts; الطريق قطع highway robbery,
 brigandage; على الطريق قطع forcible prevention of s.th., radical stop to s.th.; الماھية قطع q. al-māhīya salary cut, wage deduction; القطع (معدل) سعر si‘r (or mu‘addal) al-q. discount rate, bank rate; الربع قط q. ar-rub‘ (ar-rubu‘) quarto format; الجيب كتب قطع q. kutub al-jaib pocket size (book); مخروط قطع q. makrūtin,□ مخروطي قطع (makrūṭī) conic section (geom.); زائد قطع hyperbola (geom.); مكافئ قطع (mukāfi’) parabola (geom.); ناقص قطع ellipse (geom.); قطعا للوقت gaṭ‘an li-l-waqt as a pastime, just to kill time; عن النظر بقطع (bi-q. in-naẓari) irrespective of, regardless of, without regard to; aside from, apart from; ھمزة القطع disjunctive hamza (gram.)
قطعي qaṭ‘ī decided, definite, positive; final, definitive; قطعيا qaṭ‘īyan decidedly, definitely, emphatically, categorically
قطعية qaṭ‘īya certainty, definiteness, positiveness
قطعة qiṭ‘a pl. قطع qiṭa‘ piece, fragment, lump, chunk; part, portion; section, division; segment (geom.); coin; naval unit; unit (mil.) │ الدائرة قطعة or القطع القطعة الدائرية  segment of a circle (geom.); O قطعة التركيب part (of a machine, of an apparatus); O االزدواج قطع coupling element (el.); مسرحية قطعة (masraḥīya) (stage) play; غنائية قطعة (ginā’īya) vocal piece, vocal composition; التغيير قطعة or غيار قطعة spare part; فنية قطعة (fannīya) work of art; الكروية القطعة (kurawīya) spherical segment (geom.); تمثيلية قطعة (tamtīlīya) (stage) play; موسيقية قطعة piece of music, musical composition; مالية قطعة (malīya) coin; بالقطع العمل (‘amal) piecework, job work, taskwork
قطعة quṭ‘a pl. quṭu‘āt, قطع quṭa‘ a piece cut off, a cut; stump; plot of land, patch of land, lot
قطعة qaṭa‘a pl. -āt, قطع qaṭa‘ stump 776
قطاع qiṭā‘, quṭā‘ pl. -āt section; sector (geom.) │ عرضي قطاع (‘arḍī) cross section; األنسجة من قطاعات (ansija) tissue sections (biol.); الدائري القطاع (dā’irī) sector of a circle (geom.); الكروي القطاع (kurawī) spherical sector (geom.)
قطاع qaṭṭā‘ (stone-, wood-) cutter
بالقطاعي bi-l-qaṭtā‘ī by retail, retail (adj.)
قطيع qaṭī‘ pl. قطاع qiṭā‘, قطعان quṭ‘ān, اقطاع aqṭā‘ troop or group (of animals), drove, flock, herd
قطيعة qaṭī‘a rupture of relations, break, breach, rift, alienation, estrangement, separation; enmity among relatives (short for الرحم قطيعة q. ar-raḥim); (pl. قطائع qaṭā’i‘ ) fief, fee, feudal estate, land granted by feudal tenure
اقطع aqṭa‘  more convincing, more conclusive (evidence); (f. قطعاء qaṭ‘ā’ ) amputee; one-armed; dumb, mute
مقطع maqṭa’ pl. مقاطع maqāṭi‘  crossing point, crossing, traverse, passage; ford; (point of) intersection; cross section; section, division; syllable; musical phrase; quarry; group of animals,
drove │ الرأي مقطع m. ar-ra’y decision, judgment
مقطع miqṭa‘ pl. مقاطع maqāṭi‘  cutting instrument │ السيجار مقطع cigar cutter; مقطع الورق m. al-waraq paper knife; paper cutter
تقطيع taqṭī‘ fragmentation, dismemberment, cutting up, division, partitioning; interruption, disruption, discontinuation; gripes, colic; (pl. تقاطيع taqāṭī‘) stature, figure; shape, form; pl. parts, portions,
sections, members │ الوجه تقاطيع t. al- wajh features, lineaments of the face
مقاطعة muqāṭa‘a separation; break (with s.o.); indifference, unfeelingness, unlovingness; boycott; interruption; (pl.
-āt) area, region, section, district, province
اقطاع iqṭā‘ and اقطاعة iqṭā‘a pl. -āt fief, fee, feudal estate, land granted by feudal tenure │ اإلقطاع ذو liege lord, feudal lord
اقطاعي iqṭā‘ī liege, feudatory, feudal; (pl. -ūn) liege lord, feudal lord
the اإلقطاعية feudalism; iqṭā‘īya اقطاعية system feudal
تقطع taqaṭṭu‘ pl. -āt interruptedness, interruption
تقاطع taqāṭu’ severance of mutual relations; crossing; intersection, junction
 انقطاع inqiṭā’ separation, disjunction, severance; break, breach, rift, rupture, break-off; interruption, disruption, discontinuance; cessation, stop, termination, expiration, extinction; stoppage, shutdown, blockage, suspension; end, close, conclusion; absence, withdrawal, aloofness (عن from)
│ التيار انقطاع inq. at-tayyār power shutdown (el.); انقطاع بدون or انقطاع غير من incessantly, constantly, continually, without interruption
انقطاعية inqiṭā’īya separatism
استقطاع istiqṭā’ pl. -āt cut, deduction (e.g., from salary)
قاطع qāṭi’ cutting; sharp; convincing, cogent, irrefutable, conclusive, decisive (e.g., evidence); decided, definite, positive, unmistakable, unequivocal; final, definitive; sour (milk); secant (geom.); (pl. قواطع qawāṭi’ ) partition, screen │ قاطع الطريق pl. الطرق قطاع quṭṭā’ aṭ-ṭuruq (or قطع الطرق quṭṯa’ aṭ-ṭ.) highway robber, holdup man, waylayer, brigand; قاطعة بصفة (bi- ṣifatin) unmistakably; قاطعة سن (sinn) incisor; قواطع طير ṭairun qawāṭi’u migratory birds; التذاكر قاطع ticket seller, conductor (streetcar, bus, etc.)
O قاطعة qāṭi’a interrupter, circuit breaker (el.) 777
مقطوع maqṭū’ cut off, severed, chopped off, etc.; به مقطوع decided, finished, settled, done with (matter, affair); (pl. مقاطيع maqāṭī’ ) short poem │ النظير مقطوع matchless, peerless, unrivaled, unequaled
مقطوعة maqṭū’a pl. -āt, مقاطيع maqāṭī’  piece (of music) │ موسيقية مقطوعة piece of music, musical composition
مقطوعية maqṭū’īya share, portion, allotment: consumption │ بالمقطوعية (eg.) in the lump, for a lump sum
مقطع muqaṭṭa’ torn, shredded
مقطع muqṭi’ liege lord; -- muqṭa’ liege man, feudatory. feudal tenant, vassal
متقطع mutaqaṭṯi’ cut off, torn, ruptured, disrupted, interrupted; discontinuous, flowing intermittently (electric current); in stages (movement); staccato (voice);
incoherent, disjointed (words) │ متقطع تيار
(tayyār) alternating current
منقطع munqaṭi’ cut off; severed, disjoined, separate(d), detached; chopped off, detruncated; cut, cut in two, sundered, torn. ruptured, disrupted; broken; broken off; interrupted, discontinued, stopped, blocked; disconnected, turned off, switched off (electric current); halting, discontinuous, intermittent, fitful; outlying, remote, out-of-the-way (region); devoted, dedicated (ل or الى to), set aside exclusively, solely destined (ل or الى for)
│ النظير منقطع and القرين منقطع unmatched, matchless, peerless, unrivaled, unequaled, incomparable, singular, unique; منقطع غير incessant, unceasing, continual, uninterrupted
مستقطع mustaqṭa’ cut, deduction (from salary)
قطف qaṭafa i (qaṯf, قطوف quṭūf) to pick (ھ flowers, fruit); to gather, harvest (ھ fruit); to pluck off, pull off, tear off (ھ s.th., e.g., leaves); (eg.) to skim (ھ a liquid from the surface): -- (qaṭf) to scratch, scratch up (ه s.o.) II = I VIII to pick (ھ flowers, fruit); to gather, harvest (ھ fruit); to pluck off (ھ s.th.); to select, choose, pick out (من ھ s.th. from among)
قطف qaṭf (act or instance of) picking, etc.; (pl. قطوف quṭūf) scratch
قطف qiṯāf picked fruit
قطاف qiṭāf picking, gathering, harvest (of fruit); picking season, vintage, harvest time
القطوف داني dānī l-quṭūf within reach, at hand; easy to apply, easy to use, handy
قطوف qaṭūf pl. قطف quṭuf short-stepped, slow
قطيفة qaṭīfa velvet; plush
قطائف qaṭā’if , قطايف qaṭāyif  (pl.) small, triangular doughnuts fried in melted butter and served with honey
مقطف miqṭaf pl. مقاطف maqāṭ□if   implement for picking fruit, fruit picker; vine knife
مقطف magṭaf pl. مقاطف maqāṭif   basket
 اقتطاف iqtiṭāf picking, gathering, etc.; selection, choice, pick
مقتطف muqtaṭaf pl. -āt selected or select piece; selection
قطقوطة qaṭqūṭa young girl
قطل qaṭala u i (qaṭf) to cut off (ھ s.th.) II = I
قطيلة qaṭīla towel; floor rag
قطم qaṭama i (qaṭm) to cut off (ھ s.th.): to break off (ھ s.th.)
قطمة qaṭma piece; bite, morsel
المقطم al-muqaṭṭam a range of hills east of Cairo 778
قطمير qiṭmīr pellicle enveloping a date pit │ ال قطميرا يملك (yamliku) he doesn’t own a thing, he hasn’t a red cent to his name
 قطن qaṭana u (قطون quṭūn) to live, dwell, reside (في or ب or ھ in a place); to inhabit (في or ب or ھ a place) II to make live, settle (ھ ب s.o. in)
قطن qaṭan small of the back
قطن quṭn, quṭun pl. اقطان aqṭān cotton │ خام قطن raw cotton, cotton, wool, unginned cotton; سكارتو قطن (It. scarto) (eg.) cotton waste; طبي قطن (ṭibbī) absorbent cotton; ملتھب قطن (multahib) guncotton; O حطب القطن ḥaṭab al-q. excelsior; القطن محلج miḥlaj al.q. cotton gin
قطني quṭnī cotton (adj.)
قطنية quṭnīya, qiṭnīya pl. قطاني qaṭānīy
pulse, legumes (peas, beans, lentils)
قطانية quṭānīya, qiṭānīya Indian corn, maize (tun.)
قطان qaṭtān cotton manufacturer, cotton merchant
يقطين yaqṭīn (coll.; n. un. ة) a variety of squash
مقطنة maqṭana cotton plantation
قاطن qāṭin pl. قطان quṭṭān resident, domiciled; inhabitant, dweller
 قيطن qīṭān pl. قياطين qayāṭīn  cord, braid, lace
قطا qaṭan (coll.; n. un. قطاة qaṭāh) sand grouse (Pterocles)
قعد qa‘ada u (قعد qu‘ūd) to sit down, take a seat; to sit, be sitting; to remain
seated; to remain, stay, abide; to lie in wait (ل for s.o.), waylay (ل s.o.); to desist, abstain, refrain (عن from), renounce waive (عن s.th.) │ به قعد to make s.o. sit down, make s.o. sit, seat s.o., induce s.o. to stay; to hamper, handicap, hamstring, disable, paralyze s.o.; ركبتاه به قعدت (rukbatāhu) his knees buckled under him; عن به قعد to hold back, restrain, discourage, or prevent s.o. from; الذھاب عن قعد (dahāb) he decided not to go; وقعد قام to be in a state of great anxiety, be seriously upset, be very agitated; to be very alarmed (ل by) IV to make (ه s.o.) sit down; to make (ه s.o.) sit; to cause or induce (ه s.o.) to stay; to seat (ه s.o.); to hold back, restrain, discourage, prevent (ه عن s.o. from); to decrease, diminish, reduce (من s.th.); pass uq‘ida to be lame, be crippled │ واقعده اقامه (aqāmahū) to
upset s.o. seriously, throw s.o. in a state of violent emotion; ھمته من اقعد (himmatihī) to dampen s.o.’s zeal V not to desire (عن s.th.). not to be out for s.th. (عن); to desist, abstain, refrain (عن from) VI = V; to remain aloof, refrain, forbear, withdraw ( عن from); to be pensioned off, retire VIII to take or use as a seat (ھ s.th.); to sit down (ھ on s.th.); to be, remain (ھ in a state or condition)
قعد qa‘ad slackers, shirkers of military service in times of war; also, designation of the Khawarij
قعدة qa‘da sitting; backside, seat, buttocks, posteriors; space occupied while sitting, seating space │ القعد ذو name of the eleventh month of the Muslim year
قعدة qi‘da manner of sitting, seat, pose, posture; space occupied while sitting, seating space
قعدة qu‘ada constantly or frequently sitting, sedentary; glued to the seat, not budging, seated firmly; lazy, inert, indolent
قعدي qu‘dī constantly or frequently sitting, sedentary; glued to the seat, not budging, firmly seated; lazy, inert, indolent
 قعود qa‘ūd pl. اقعدة al-Qur'an‘ida قعد qu‘ud, قعدان qi‘dān, قعائد qa‘ā’id  young camel 779
قعود qu‘ūd sitting; desistance, abstention, refraining (عن from); renunciation, abandonment, waiver (عن of)
قعيد qa‘īd companion; one with whom one sits together; keeper, guardian, supervisor, superintendent; crippled, disabled, infirm │ المنزل قعيد q. al-manzil confined to one’s house or to one’s quarters
قعيدة qa‘īda pl. قعائد qa‘ā’id  woman companion; wife, spouse
مقعد maq‘ad pl. مقعد maq‘ad  s.th. to sit on, space to sit in; seat (in general, in a theater, in parliament, etc.); chair; bench; sofa, settee; box, driver’s seat (of a carriage or coach) │ طويل مقعد chaise longue; مريح مقعد (murīḥ) easy chair, armchair
maqā‘d  مقاعد pl. maq‘ada مقعدة
backside, seat, buttocks, posteriors
تقاعد taqā‘ud restraint, reticence, aloofness, reserve; retirement │ التقاعد معاش ma‘āš at-t. retiring allowance, superannuation. pension; التقاعد الى احيل (uḥīla) to be pensioned off, be superannuated, be retired
قاعد qā‘id pl. قعود qu‘ūd, قعاد qu‘ād, sitting, seated; inactive, idle, lazy, also قاعد العمل (‘amal); قاعدون qā‘idūn slacken, shirkers of military service in times of war; -- قاعد qā‘id pl. قواعد qawā‘id  woman who, because of her age, has ceased to bear children
قاعدة qā‘ida pl. قواعد qawā‘id  foundation, groundwork; basis; fundament; base (geom.; mil.); support, base, socle, foot, pedestal; O chassis, undercarriage; precept, rule, principle, maxim; formula; method, manner, mode; model, pattern │ األسطول قاعدة q. al-usṭūl or بحرية قاعدة (baḥrīya) naval base; البالد قاعدة capital of the country; جوية قاعدة (jawwīya) airbase; حربية قاعدة (ḥarbīya) base of operation; الملك قاعدة q. al-mulk seat of government; القاعدة مساحة misāḥat al-q. base, basal surface
مقعد muq‘ad brought to a standstill, stopped, arrested; lame, crippled, disabled, infirm; an invalid
متقاعد mutaqā‘id retired; pensioner
قعر qa‘ara u (قعارة qa‘āra) to be deep, hollowed out II to make deep or deeper, deepen (ھ s.th.); to hollow out, make hollow, excavate (ھ s.th.); to cry, shout, scream │ كالمه في قعر (kalāmihī) to speak gutturally IV to make deep or deeper, deepen (ھ a well) V to be depressed, sunk, low, deep, hollowed out, dished, concave; to descend to the bottom
قعر qa‘r pl. قعور qu‘ūr bottom; depth; keel (of a ship); pit, hole, hollow, cavity, depression │ صاعدا القعر من (ṣā‘idan) from the ground up
قعرة qa‘ra pit, hole, hollow, cavity, depression
قعور qa‘ūr deep
قعير qa‘īr deep
مقعر muqa‘‘ar depressed, sunk, low, deep; hollow, dished, concave; curved; obscure (language)
قعس qa‘isa a (qa‘s) to have a protruding chest and hollow back, be pigeon-breasted VI to remain aloof, keep away, stay away, desist, refrain (عن from); to hesitate, waver, be reluctant (عن to do s.th.); to fail, neglect (عن to do s.th.); to be uninterested (عن in) XIV اقعنسس iq‘ansasa
= I
اقعس aq‘asa having a protruding chest and hollow back, pigeon-breasted │ عز اقعس (‘izz) firmly established power
تقاعس taqā‘us negligence
متقاعس mutaqā‘is hesitant, wavering, reluctant; negligent, careless, sloppy, listless, idle 780
قعقع qa‘qa‘a (قعقعة qa‘qa‘a) to clatter; to rattle; to clank
قعقع qa‘qa‘, qu‘qu‘ magpie
قعقعة qa‘qa‘a clatter; rattle; clank, clang; noise, din; pl. قعاقع qa‘āaqi‘ high- sounding words
قف qaffa u (قفوف qufūf) to be dry, withered, shriveled; to dry up, wither, shrivel; to
 contract, shrink; to bristle, stand on and (hair)
قفة quffa pl. قفف qufaf large basket; (Mesopotamian) round boat, gufa (ir.)
قفر quffa, qaffa feverish shiver, ague fit
قفر qafara u (qafr): اثره قفر (atarahū) to follow s.o.’s tracks, track s.o. IV to be or become empty, bleak, desolate, deserted, depopulated, unihabited, devastated, waste; to be destitute, be devoid (من of) to ravage, lay waste, devastate, desolate, depopulate (ھ s.th.); to abandon, leave in a state of desolation (ھ houses, a city); to gnaw off, pick (ھ a bone) VIII to follow s.o.’s (ه) tracks, track (ه s.o.)
قفر qalr pl. قفار qifār desert, wasteland, desolate region; empty, bleak, forsaken, forlorn, deserted, lifeless, uninhabited, depopulated, devastated, desolate, waste; destitute, devoid (من of) │ قفار) قفر ارض) (arḍ) wasteland; قفر خبز (kubz) plain bread, dry bread
قفرة qafra pl. qafarāt desert, wasteland, desolate region
قفار خبز kubzun qafārun plain bread, dry bread
قفير qafīr pl. قفران qufrān beehive قفراء بادية bādiya qafrā’  arid desert اقفار  iqfār emptiness bleakness,
desolateness, desolation; ravage, devastation, depopulation
مقفر muqfir empty, bleak, forsaken, forlorn, deserted, lifeless, uninhabited, depopulated, devastated, desolate, waste; destitute, devoid (من of)
قفز qafaza i (qafz, قفزان qafazān) to jump, leap, spring, hurdle, bound; to jump up, leap in the air; to jump off, take off V to put on or wear gloves
القفز │ athlet.) (also jumping qafz قفز القفز rope; the skipping (ḥabl) على الحبل jump; broad قفز طويل vaulting; pole بالزانة jump high (‘ālin) قفز عال
قفزة qafza pl. qafazāt jump, leap, spring, bound
قفاز quffāz pl. -āt, قفافيز qafāfīz  glove; a pair of gloves
قفيز qafīz pl. اقفزة aqfiza cafiz, a dry measure, ca. 496-640 l, = 16 whibas (Tun.)
مقفز maqfiz springboard
قفش qafaša i u (qafš) to gather, collect (ھ s.th.); (eg.) to catch, seize, grasp, grab; to find out, discover (ھ s.th.)
قفش qafš prattle, chatter
قفشات qafazāt (pl.) jokes
قفص qafaṣ pl. اقفاص aqfāṣ cage; birdcage; pen, coop, wired enclosure; basket (made of palm fronds); thorax, chest; (prisoner’s) dock (= االتھام قفص q. al-ittihām)
تقفيصة taqfīṣa poultry coop
قفطان qufṭān pl. قفاطين qafāṭīn caftam, a long- sleeved outer garment, open in front and fastened by a ḥizām
القفقاس al-qafqās the Caucasus
قفع qafa‘a a (qafa‘) to contract; to shrink; to shrivel, become wrinkled II to shrivel (ھ the fingers; of the cold) V = I
قفع qaf‘ testudo 781
قفقف qafqafa (قفقفة qafqafa) and II taqafqafa to shiver with cold
قفل qafala u i (قفول qufūl) to come home, come back, return; -- i (qafl) to shut, close (ھ s.th.); to latch, lock, shut up, bolt (ھ s.th.); to accumulate, amass, hoard (ھ s.th.) II and IV to padlock (ھ s.th.); to shut, close ( ھ s.th.); to switch off, shut off, turn off (ھ s.th.); to cut off, stop (ھ the supply of), block, bar, close (ھ s.th.); to latch, lock, shut up, bolt (ھ s.th.)
قفل qufl pl. اقفال aqfāl, قفول qufūl padlock; lock, latch; bolt; O lock (of a canal)
قفال qaffāl locksmith
اقفال iqfāl shutting, closing, closure; shutting up; locking, bolting; stoppage, blocking, blockage, barring, obstruction
قافل qāfil pl. قافلة qāfila, قفال quffāl home-coming, returning; homecomer, repatriate
caravan; qawāfil  قوافل pl. qāfila قافلة قافلة )تجارية( بحرية │ convoy column;
 (tijārīya, baḥrīya) or السفن قافلة q. as-sufun
naval convoy
قفو) قفا) qafā u (qafw) to follow (اثره atarahū
s.o.’s tracks) II to send (ب or ه ه s.o. after
s.o. else); to rhyme, put into rhyme VIII اثره اقتفى (atarahū) to follow s.o.’s tracks, track s.o.; to follow up, pursue s.o. (mil.); to follow in s.o.’s tracks, follow s.o.’s example, imitate s.o.
قفا qafan m. and f., pl. اقفية aqfiya, اقف aqfin, اقفاء aqfā’, قفي qufīy, qifīy nape; occiput, back of the head; back; reverse; wrong side (of a fabric)
قفاء qafā’ nape; occiput, back of the head
اقتفاء iqtifā’ following (of s.o.’s tracks), tracking; imitation
قافية qāfiya pl. قواف qawāfin rhyme; (eg.) play on words, pun, double, entendre; nape
قيقب look up alphabetically
alphabetically up look قاقم and قاقلة، قاقلي
قل qalla i (qill, qull, قلة qilla) to be or become little, small, few (in number or quantity), trifling, insignificant, inconsiderable, scant, scanty, sparse, spare, meager; to be rare, scarce; to be of rare occurrence, happen seldom; to decrease, diminish, wane, grow less; to be or become less, littler, smaller, fewer (in number or quantity), more trifling, less significant, less considerable, scanter, scantier, sparser (عن than); to be second, be inferior (عن to s.o.) -- (qall) to pick up, raise, lift (ه ھ، عن s.o., s.th. from the ground); to carry (ھ s.th.) │ وندر قل ما اال (illā, wa-nadara) but for a few exceptions, with a few exceptions only; صبره قل (ṣabruhū) to be impatient lose one’s patience II to make little or leas, diminish, lessen, decrease, reduce, do seldom or less frequently (.
or .,.. s.th.) IV = II; to do or give little (من in or of); to pick up, raise, lift (ه ھ، عن s.o., s.th. from the ground); to be able to carry (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to carry, transport, convey (ه s.o., ھ s.th.) VI to think little (ھ of), scorn, disdain, despise (ھ s.th.) X to find (ھ s.th.) little, small, inconsiderable, insignificant, trifling; to esteem lightly, undervalue, despise (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to
make light (ه ھ، of), set little store (ه ھ، by), care little (ه ھ، for); to pick up, raise, lift (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to carry, transport, convey (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to board (ھ s.th., e.g., a ship, a carriage, or the like); to rise; to be independent; to possess alone (ب s.th.) │ بحمل استقل (bi-ḥimlin) to assume a burden; بصنعه استقل (bi-ṣan‘ihī) he alone made it, he was the only one who made it; ٢٨٧ بنفسه استقل (bi-nafsihī) to be entirely self-reliant, be left to one’s own devices; to be independent, manage without others, get along by oneself; (بمھمة استقل (بواجب
(bi-muhimmatin, bi-wājibin) to assume a task (or duty)
قلما qallamā (conj.) seldom, rarely; scarcely, barely, hardly
قل qill, qull littleness, smallness, fewness; insignificance, inconsiderableness, triviality, paucity, paltriness, scarceness, sparseness, scantiness, insufficiency; a little, a small number, a small quantity, a modicum; -- qill tremor
قلة qalla recovery, recuperation; restoration of prosperity
قلة qulla highest point; top, summit; apex; vertex; (cannon) ball; (pl. قلل qulal) jug, pitcher
قلة qilla pl. قلل qilal littleness, fewness; smallness, inconsiderableness, insignificance, triviality; paucity, paltriness, scantiness, sparseness; scarceness, rareness, rarity; minority; lack, want, deficiency, insufficiency, scarcity │ اإلحساس قلة q. al-iḥsās insensitivity, obtuseness; الحياء قلة q. al-ḥayā’ shamelessness, impudence, insolence, impertinence; الصبر قلة q. aṣ-ṣabr impatience; الوجود قلة scantiness, scarcity; rareness, rarity; القلة جمع jam‘ al-q. (gram.) plural of paucity (for persons or things whose number is between three and ten)
بقليته bi-qillīyatihī completely, wholly, entirely │ بقليتھم رحلوا (raḥalū) they setout all together or with bag and baggage
قليل qalīl pl. اقالء aqillā’, قالئل qalā’il , قالل qilāl little; few; insignificant, inconsiderable, trifling; small (in number or quantity), scant, scanty, spare, sparse,
 meager, insufficient; scarce, rare; a small number, a small quantity, a modicum, a little (من of); قليال qalīlan a little, somewhat; seldom, rarely │ ما قليال seldom, rarely; قليال قليال by and by, slowly, gradually; قليال اال الكل al-kull illā q. almost everything, nearly all; قليل بعد a little later, some time later on, shortly afterward; shortly, before long; قليل عن or قليل عما (‘ammā) soon, before long, shortly; منه ليس بكثير وال بقليل ال to have absolutely nothing to do with s.th.; األدب قليل q. al-adab uncivil, impolite, rude, uncouth; الحياء قليل
q. al-ḥayā’ shameless, brazen, impudent, insolent, impertinent; االرتفاع قليل low; قليل الصبر q. aṣ-ṣabr impatient; الوجود قليل scanty, scarce; rare
اقل aqalla less; fewer; smaller; rarer; األقل the least, the minimum │ األقل على or باألقل at the very least; at least; تقدير اقل على (at the lowest estimate) = من اقل ال األقل؛ على ان (aqalla) the least one can do is to ...; I (you, etc.) could at least ...; القليل من اقل quite insignificant, all but negligible; واقل ان وذاك ھذا من let alone that …, not to mention that …, to say nothing of ...
اقلية aqallīya smaller number, numerical inferiority; (pl. -āt) minority
تقليل taqlīl decrease, diminution, reduction
اقالل iqlāl decrease, diminution, reduction
استقالل istiqlāl independence
استقاللي istiqlālī of or pertaining to independence, independence (used attributively); proponent of independence
مقل muqill propertyless, unpropertied, without means, poor, destitute
مستقل mustaqill independent; autonomous; separate, distinct, particular
قالووظ , قالووز (Turk. kılavuz) qalāwūẓ ship’s pilot; screw
قالية qallāyz pl. -āt, قاللي qalālīy (monastic) cell; residence of the Coptic Patriarch (Chr.) 783
قلب qalaba i (qalb) to turn around, turn about, turn up(ward), upturn (ھ s.th.); to turn, turn over (ھ s.th.); to turn face up or face down (ھ s.th.); to turn inside out or
outside in (ھ s.th.); to turn upside down ( ھ s.th.); to tip, tilt over, topple over (ھ s.th.); to invert, reverse (ھ s.th.); to overturn, upset, topple (ھ s.th.); to capsize (ھ s.th.); to roll over (ھ s.th.); to subvert, overthrow (ھ a government); to change, alter, turn, transform, convert, transmute ( ھ s.th., ھ ھ s.th. to or into s.th.); to transpose (ھ s.th.); to exchange
(ھ ھ s.th. for s.th.) │ رأسا قلبه (ra’san) to turn s.th. upside down; المجن ظھر له قلب (ẓahra l-mijan) to show s.o. the back of the shield, i.e., to give s.o. the cold shoulder, become hostile to s.o. II to turn, turn around, turn about, turn up(ward), upturn, turn over (ھ s.th.); to turn face up or face down (ھ s.th.); to turn inside out or outside in (ھ s.th.); to turn upside down (ھ s.th.); to tip, tilt over, topple over (ھ s.th.); to invert, reverse (ھ s.th.); to overturn, upset, overthrow, topple (ھ s.th.); to capsize (ھ s.th.); to roll over (ھ s.th.); to turn, turn over (ھ pages); to rummage, ransack, rake (ھ s.th.); to roll ( ھ s.th.); to stir (ھ s.th.); to examine, study, scrutinize, investigate (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to change, alter, turn, transform, convert, transmute (ھ s.th., ھ ھ s.th. to or into s.th.) │ يديه بين قلبه (yadaihi) to turn s.th. around in one’s hands, fidget with s.th.; بعقله قلبه (bi-’aqlihī) to turn s.th. over in one’s mind, reflect on s.th., ponder s.th., brood over s.th.; لبطن ظھرا قلبه (ẓahran li- baṭnin) to turn s.th. completely upside down, turn s.th. topsy-turvy, turn s.th. over and over; كفيه قلب (kaffaihi) to repent, be grieved; to be embarrassed; البصر فيه قلب (baṣara) or النظر فيه قلب (naẓara) to scrutinize, eye, regard s.th. V to be turned around, be turned over, be reversed, be inverted; to be overturned, get knocked over (e.g., a glass); to toss and turn, toss about; to writhe, twist, squirm, wriggle; to be changed, be altered, change; to fluctuate (prices); to be changeable, variable, inconstant, fickle (في in s.th.); to move (about), live, be at home (في in); to dispose (في of), have at one’s disposal (في s.th.) │ عديدة وظائف في تقلب (waẓā’ifa ‘adīdatin) he held numerous offices; تقلب النعيم) النعمة في) (ni‘ma), العيش اعطاف في تقلب الناعم (a. il-‘aiš) to lead a life of ease and comfort, live in prosperity; رمضاء على تقلب
 البؤس (ramḍā’ l-bu’s) to live in utmost misery VII to be turned, be turned around, be turned about, be turned up(ward), be upturned, be turned over; to be reversed, be inverted; to be turned inside out or outside in; to be turned upside down, be toppled, get knocked over; to be overturned, be upset, be overthrown; to be rolled, over; to overturn, somersault; to capsize; to be changed, be altered, be transformed, be converted, be transmuted; to change, turn (ھ or الى into s.th.), become (ھ or الى s.th.); to turn (على against; الى to); to return; (with foil. imperi.) to proceed suddenly to do s.th., shift, instantly to s.th., change over to s.th.
│ لبطن ظھرا انقلب (ẓahra li-baṭnin) to be turned topsy-turvy; to be completely devastated; الھجوم الى انقلب to take the offensive
قلب qalb reversal, inversion; overturn, upheaval; conversion, transformation, transmutation; transposition (of letters), metathesis (gram.); perversion, change, alteration; overthrow (of a government)
قلب qalb pl. قلوب qulūb heart; middle, center; core, gist, essence; marrow, medulla, pith; the best or choicest part; mind, soul, spirit │ األسد قلب q. al-asad Regulus (star α in the constellation Leo; 784  astron.); الھجوم قلب center forward (soccer); القلوب سويداء suwaidā’ al-q. the innermost of the heart, the bottom of the heart; القلب ضعيف fainthearted, pusillanimous, recreant, cowardly; قاسي القلب qāsī l-q. hardhearted, callous, pitiless, merciless, cruel; القلب قساوة qasāwat al-q. hardheartedness, callousness, pitilessness, cruelty; القلب انقباض dejectedness, despondency, dispiritedness, depression; القلب ظھر عن (ẓahri l-q.) by heart; صميم من القلب from the bottom of the heart, most sincerely; قلبه كل من with all his heart; قلبا وقالبا qalban wa-qālaban with heart and soul; inwardly and outwardly; السكر) قلوبات) qulūbāt (as-sukkar) small candies, lozenges
قلبي qalbī of or pertaining to the heart, heart- (in compounds), cardiac, cardiacal; cordial, hearty, warm, sincere; قلبيا qalbīyan cordially, heartily, warmly, sincerely
قلب qulb, qalb, qilb palm pith, palm core (edible tuber growing at the upper end of the palm trunk); qulb bracelet, bangle
قلبة qalba (eg.) lapel; (pl. -āt) a measure of capacity (Tun.; = 20 l)
قلب qullab tending to change; agile, adaptable, resourceful; versatile, many- sided, of varied skills or talents
قالب qālab, qālib pl. قوالب qawālib  form; mold; cake pan; model; matrix; last, boot tree, shoe tree │ جبن قالب q. jubn a chunk or loaf of cheese; سكر قالب q. sukar sugar loaf; صابون قالب q. ṣābūn a cake or bar of soap; وقالبا قلبا (qalban) with heart and soul; inwardly and outwardly
قلب aqliba, اقلبة pl. f., and m. qalīb قليب
qulub, قلبان qulbān well
قلوب qalūb tending to change; agile, adaptable, resourceful; versatile, many- sided
قالب qallāb changeable, variable, unsteady, inconstant, fickle, wavering, vacillating; reversible, tiltable; dumper; tip wagon, skip │ قالبة عربة (‘araba) tipcart; خالط قالب (kallāṭ) rotary mixer
قالبة qallāba agitator, stirring machine
مقلب maqlab pl. مقالب maqālib  (eg.) refuse dump, dump pile, dump; intrigue, scheme. plot; April fool’s joke
مقلب miqlab pl. مقالب maqālib  hoe
تقليب taqlīb: النظر تقليب عند ‘inda t. in- naẓar on closer inspection or examination, when examined more closely
تقلب taqallub pl. -āt alteration, transformation, change; variation; fluctuation (of prices); changeableness, variableness, unsteadiness, inconstancy, fickleness; pl. vicissitudes, ups and downs
│ جوي تقلب (jawwī) change of weather; التقلب سريع very changeable, very fickle, capricious
انقالب inqilāb upheaval; revolution, overthrow, bouleversement; alteration, transformation, change; solstice │ دائرة االنقالب tropic (geogr.)
مقلوب maqlūb turned over, turned upside down, turned about, inverted,
 inverse, reverse(d), etc.; infolded (bem, seam); reciprocal (math.) │ بالمقلوب topsy- turvy; upside down; wrong side out; the other way round, reversely, conversely, vice versa
متقلب mutaqallib, also األطوار متقلب األحوال)) wavering, vacillating, changeable, variable, inconstant, unsteady, fickle, capricious
منقلب munqalab (place of overthrow, i.e.) the hereafter, the end one meets in death, the way of all flesh, final destiny; tropic │ منقلب (šatawī) Tropic of Capricorn; صيفي منقلب (ṣaifī) Tropic of Cancer 785
قلبق qalbaq a tall, usually cylindrical, fur cap
 قلح qalaḥ yellowness of the teeth
قالح qulāḥ yellowness of the teeth
  قولحةqaulaḥa pl. قوالح qawāliḥ  (eg.) cob (of corn, and the like)
  قلدII to adorn with a necklace (ھا a woman); to gird (ھ ه s.o. with); to invest (ھ ه s.o. with an office), appoint (ه ھ s.o. to an office), award (ه ھ to s.o. a decoration, an order), confer (ه ھ upon s.o. a rank); to grant (ه ھ to s.o. a favor); to entrust (ه ھ
s.o. with the rule or government of s.th.), give (ه s.o.) authority or power (ھ over s.th.); to follow blindly another’s (ه) opinion; to copy, ape, imitate (ه s.o.); to forge, counterfeit (ھ s.th.) V to put on or wear a necklace, adorn o.s. with a necklace; to gird o.s. (ھ with), put on (ھ s.th.); to take upon o.s., assume (ھ s.th.); to take over (ھ s.th., esp. power, control, government)
قالدة qilāda pl. قالئد qalā’id  necklace; pl. قالئد exquisite poems
مقلد miqlad pl. مقالد maqālid  key
│ key maqālīd  مقاليد pl. miqlād مقالد مقاليد الحكم power; positions, key مقاليد األمور
m. al-ḥukm the reins of government or power; الحكم مقاليد تسلم (tasallama) to take over (the reins of) government, seize power; األمور مقاليد اليه القى (alqā) to entrust
s.o. with the management, put s.o. in charge
تقليد taqlīd pl. تقاليد taqālīd  imitation; copying; blind, unquestioning adoption (of concepts or ideas); uncritical faith
(e.g., in a source’s authoritativeness); adoption of the legal decision of a madhab (lsl. Law); pl. tradition; convention, custom, usage
تقليدي taqlīdī traditional, customary, conventional; based on uncritical faith (e.g., in a source’s authoritativeness)
مقلد  muqalld imitated, imitation, forged, counterfeit(ed), fake, sham, spurious, false; tradition-bound
key aqālīd  اقاليد pl. iqlīd اقليد 
القلزم بحر baḥr al-qulzum the Red Sea
 قلس qalasa i (qals) to belch, burp, eruct II to bow (ل to s.o.); (eg.) to make fun (على of), poke fun (على at), ridicule (على s.o., s.th.)
  قلسII to put a cap (قنلسوة qalansuwa, q.v., ه on s.o.’s head)
 قلس qals pl. قلوس qulūs hawser, cable, rope
 قلش II to molt
تقليش taqlīš molting, molt
 قالوش (Fr. galoche) galōš pl. -āt galosh, overshoe
قلشين qalšīn pl. قالشين qalāšīn  puttee
قلص qalaṣa i (قلص qulūṣ) to contract; to shrink (laundered garment); to decrease, diminish; to dwindle, fade, wane, decline; to become shorter, recede (shadow) │ قلص ظله (ẓilluhū) his prestige declined; it decreased, dwindled, faded II to contract, draw together (ھ s.th.); to tuck up, roll up (ھ s.th.) V = I; ظله قلص = ظله تقلص
اقلص aqlaṣa  shorter
تقلص taqallaṣa contraction, shrinking, shrinkage
قليط qillīṭ scrotal hernia
قليط qllīṭ afflicted with scrotal hernia
قلع qala‘a a (qal‘) to pluck out, tear out, pull out, weed out, uproot (ھ s.th.); to root out, exterminate, extirpate (ھ s.th.); to take off (ھ clothes) │ جذوره مه قلعه to pull out s.th. with the root, II to pluck out, tear out, pull out, weed out, uproot (. s.th.); to
 root out, exterminate, 786 extirpate ( ھs.th.) IV to set sail, prepare to sail, get under sail; to sail, put to sea, depart (ship); to take off (airplane); to desist, abstain, refrain (عن from); leave off, abandon, give up, renounce, relinquish (عن s.th.) VIII to pluck out, tear out, pull out, weed out, uproot (عن s.th.); to root out, exterminate, extirpate (ھ s.th.)
قلع qil’ pl. قلوع qul’, قالع qilā’ sail (of a ship)
qulū’ قلوع qilā’, قالع pl. qal’a قلعة
fortress, stronghold, fort; citadel
قالع qulā’ thrush, canker of the mouth, ulcerative stomatitis, stomacace (med.)
(ḥummā) الحمى القالعية qulā’ī: قالعي disease footand-and-mouth
مقلع maqla’ pl. مقالع maqāli’  stone quarry
maqālī’  مقاليع pl. miqlā’  مقالع
slingshot, sling; catapult
اقالع iqlā’ sailing, departure (of a ship); take-off (of an airplane)
قلعط qal’aṭa to soil, sully, smirch (ھ s.th.)
قلعوط qul’ūṭ a heretic
  قلف qalafa i (qalf) to hark (ھ a tree), strip the bark (ھ from a tree); -- u (qalf); قلفته قلف (qulfatahū) to circumcise s.o.
قلف qilf bark, rind (of a tree)
قلفة qulfa pl. قلف qulaf foreskin, prepuce
قالفة qulāfa bark, rind (of a tree)
قلف aqlaf  uncircumcised
 قلف II to calk (ھ a ship)
قالفة qilāfa calking
 قلفة qalfa pl. -āt (tun.) foreman; workman, manual laborer
قلفط qalfaṭa to calk (ھ a ship); (eg.) to do sloppy work, scamp, bungle
قلفون qalafūn and قلفونية qalafūnīya rosin, colophony
قلق qaliqa a (qalaq) to totter, be unsteady; to be or become uneasy, disquieted, apprehensive, anxious, excited, agitated, upset, perturbed, troubled, disturbed; to be restless, be sleepless, pass, a sleepless
night, find no sleep IV to trouble, worry, alarm, disturb, upset, disconcert, disquiet, discompose, discomfit, discomfort, make uneasy or anxious (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to make restless, fill with uneasiness or anxiety, perturb, agitate, excite (ه s.o.); to rob s.o. (ه) of his rest
قلق qalaq unrest, uneasiness, disquiet, alarm; agitation, excitement, perturbation; stir, sensation; anxiety, apprehensiveness, apprehension, fear, worry, concern; restlessness; sleeplessness; impatience
قلق qaliq uneasy, disquieted; apprehensive, worried, concerned, anxious; agitated, excited, perturbed, upset; disturbed, troubled; restless; sleepless; impatient
قلوق qalūq (eg.) restless
اقالق iqlāq disquieting, troubling, perturbation; disturbance
مقلق muqliq intrigant, schemer, troublemaker
قلقاس qulqās (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. -āt a variety of taro or elephant’s ear (Colocasia antiquorum; bot.)
قلقل qalqala to move, commove, shake, convulse, unsettle (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to disturb, trouble, harass (ه ھ، s.o.; s.th.); to disquiet, alarm, excite, agitate (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to stir up, incite to rebellion (ه s.o.); to pronounce accurately (the ق) II taqalqala to be or get in state of commotion, be shaken, be convulsed, be unsettled, be disturbed, be troubled, 787 be disquieted, be alarmed, be excited, be agitated; to be stirred up, be incited to rebellion, be incensed, be rebellious; to move, budge (من from one’s place), stir; to be shaky, precarious, insecure (situation)
قلقلة qalqala pl. قالقل qalāqil  unrest, excitement, agitation, commotion; shock, convulsion, concussion; disturbance
قلقيلة (eg.) qulqēla pl. -āt clod, lump of earth
مقلقل muqalqal in a state of commotion, agitated, shaken, unsettled, etc.; unstable, inconstant, unsteady
  قلم qalama i (qalm) to cut, clip, pure (ھ nails, etc.), prune, trim, lop (ھ trees, etc.) II do.
 │ خصمه اظفار قلم (aẓāfira kaṣmihī) to neutralize, disarm one’s opponent
قلم qalam pl. اقالم aqlām reed pen; pen; writing, script, calligraphic style, ductus; handwriting; style; office, bureau, agency, department; window, counter; item, entry (com.); (eg.) stripe, streak, line; (eg.) slapin the face │ بقلمه bi-qalamihī written by him; الحبر قلم q. al-ḥibr fountain pen; قلم جاف حبر (jāff) and ناشف حبر قلم ball-point pen; التحرير قلم editor’s office, editing room; الحركة قلم q. al-ḥaraka traffic bureau; الحسابات قلم q. al-ḥisābāt accounting department; اإلدارة قلم q. al-idāra administration office, head office; قلم الرصاص q. ar-raṣāṣ pencil; السياحة قلم travel agency; االستعماالت قلم information bureau; المطبوعات قلم press and information office; القيودات قلم bureau of vital statistics, (G.B.) (general) register office; الكتاب قلم q. al- kuttāb clerical office; O الكوبية قلم q. al- kūbīya indelible pencil, copying pencil; قلم المرور (Eg.) Traffic Control Board
قالمة qulāma pl. -āt clippings, cuttings, parings, shavings; nail cuttings
مقلمة miqlama pl. -āt pen case
تقليم taqlīm clipping, trimming, paring; pruning, lopping (of trees) │ األظافر تقليم manicure
مقلم muqallam clipped, trimmed, pruned; (eg.) striped, streaked │ الظفر مقلم
m. aẓ-ẓufr powerless, helpless, weak
 اقلم aqlama to acclimate, acclimatize, adapt, adjust II ta’aqlama to acclimatize (o.s. )
اقليم iqlīm pl. اقاليم aqālīm  area, region; province; administrative district (Eg. = األقاليم ؛ مديرية the country, countryside, provinces (as opposed to the city)
اقليمي iqlīmī climatic; regional, local; territorial │ اإلقليمية المياه (miyāh) territorial waters, coastal waters
قلندار qalandār wandering dervish, calendar
قلنس II taqalnasa to wear a cap
قلنسوة qalansuwa and قلنسية qulansiya pl. قالنيس qalānīs  tall headgear, tiara, cidaris; hood, cowl, capuche; cap
قلى and (qalw) ū qalā قلي( قال and قلو(
qalā i (qaly) to fry, bake, roast (ھ s.th.); --
قال qalā u (قال qilan, قالء qalā’), قلى qalā i and قلي qaliya a (قلى qilan, قالء qalā’, مقلية maqliya) to hate, loathe, detest (ه s.o.)
قلو qilw, قلى qilan, qily alkali, base, lye (chem.)
قلوي qilwī alkaline, basic; القلويات al- qilwīyāt the bases (chem.)
قالية qallāya frying vessel, cooking vessel; see also below
مقال pl. miqlāh مقالة and miqlan مقلى
maqalin frying pan
تقلية taqliya (eg.) sauce made of garlic, coriander and melted butter and served as a condiment
قلوز qalwaza to wind (the turban)
قلوظ ٨٨٧ under see قالووز
قلوظ qalwaza to join with screws, screw together
قالووظ (also قالووز) qalāwūẓ ship’s pilot; screw
 قالية qallāya (monk’s) cell; residence of the Coptic Patriarch
  قليةqillīya (monk’s) cell
قم qamma u (qamm) to sweep (ھ s.th.)
summit, top, qimam قمم pl. qimma قمة ar-ra’s q. قمة الرأس │ apex acme, peak, al-mauja q. قمة الموجه O head; the of crown al-q.) (ḥasan ھو حسن القمة (el.); peak wave من قمة الرأس الى اخمص القدم well-built; is he من القمة الى األخمص or l-qadam) (akmaṣi toe to head from
قمامة qumāma sweepings, rubbish, refuse, garbage │ القمامة صندوق ṣundūq al-
q. garbage bin
قمائم qamā’im  sweepings, rubbish
مقمة miqamma pl. مقام maqamm  broom
قمؤ qamu’a u (قماءة qamā’a) to be little, lowly, despised, despicable; to feel inferior, feel worthless
قميء qamī’ lowly, little, small; insignificant, of little value
قماءة qamā’a lowliness, littleness, smallness; insignificance, puniness, inferiority, despicability
 قمح II to give a portion only, pay an installment (ه to s.o.) IV to put forth ears, ear, ripen (grain) │ بانفه اقمح (bi-anfih`i) to be proud, bear one’s head high
قمح qamḥ wheat
قمحي qamḥī wheat-colored, wheaten
قمحة qamḥa pl. -āt wheat kernel; grain (in Eg. = .04875 g = ¼ قيراط)
قماح شھرا šahrā qumāḥ (qimāḥ) the two coldest months of winter
قماح qammāḥ grain merchant, corn chandler
 قمر qamara i (qamr) to gamble; -- i u to defeat in gambling (ه s.o.); passs. Qumira to lose in gambling; -- qamira a (qamr) to be or become snow-blind II to toast (ھ bread) III to gamble (ه with s.o.); to .take, risk, hazard (ب s.th.); to bet, speculate (على on)
│ الخاسر الجواد على قامر (jawād) to bet on the wrong horse IV to be moonlit (night) VI to gamble with one another
قمر qamar snow blindness; -- (pl. اقمار aqmār) moon; satellite (astron.); القمران al- qamarān sun and moon الدين قمر q. ad-dīn a kind of jelly made from apricots finely ground and dried in the sun; كاذب قمر paraselene, mock moon (astron.); القمر حجر ḥajar al-q. selenite (min.)
قمرة qamara (n. un.) pl. -āt crescent (as an emblem on a uniform); (eg.) moonlight; (eg.) skylight; see also below
قمري qamarī of or pertaining to the moon, moon-shaped, moonlike, lunar │ القمرية األشھر (ašhur) the lunar months; القمرية الحروف the moon letters (gram.)
قمري qumrī (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. قماري
qamārīy a variety of turtledove
قمرة ليلة laila qamira moonlit night
قمرية qamarīya pl. -āt (eg.) skylight, small window
قمراء qamrā’  moonlight
قمير qamīr pl. اقمار aqmār fellow gambler, gambling partner, gambler
اقمر aqmar , قمراء qamrā’  moonlit (night); moon-white, bright, whitish
مقمر maqmar and مقمرة maqmara pl. مقامر maqāmir  gambling house, gambling hell
قمار qimār gambling; bet, wager │ آلة القمار لعب ālat la’b al-q. lot machine
مقامرة muqāmara gambling 789
(kahrabā’ī) مقمر كھربائي muqammir, مقمر toaster
مقمر muqammar (eg.) toast, toasted bread
مقامر muqāamir gambler
مقمر muqmir moonlit (night)
  قمرة (It. camera) qamara, qamra pl. –
āt berth, bunk, cabin, stateroom
qamāriq  قمارق pl. qumrug قمرق
customs (tun.)
قمز qamaza u i (qamz) to take with the fingertips (ھ s.th.)
قمس qamasa u i (qams) to dip, immerse, soak, steep (ه في s.th. in)
قاموس qāmūs pl. قواميس qawāmīs  ocean; dictionary, lexicon
قومس qaumas pl. قوامس qawāmis  depths of the sea; pl. mishaps, misfortunes, adversities
 قمش qamaša u i (qamš) to pick up, gather up, collect (ھ rubbish) II do.
قماش qumāš rubbish, garbage, refuse, offal, trash, junk; (pl. اقمشة aqmiša) fabric, material, cloth │ البيت قماش q. al-bait household effects, furniture; الناس قماش the scum of the earth, riff-raff
قماش qammāš draper, cloth merchant
 قمشة qamša (eg.) strap, thong; leather whip, cowhide
 قمص qamaṣa u i (qamṣ, قماص qumāṣ, qimāṣ) to gallop; to spring, jump, leap, bound; to kick II do.
قمص qamṣ gallop
  قمص II to clothe with a shirt (ه s.o.) V to put on or wear a shirt; to be clothed, be vested (ھ with), dress, attire o.s., wrap o.s. (ھ in), cloak o.s. (ھ in the mantle of; fig.); to transmigrate, pass into another body (spirit), materialize (ھ in another body)
 قميص qamīṣ pl. قمص qumuṣ, اقمصة aqmiṣa, قمصان qumṣān shirt; dress, gown; covering, cover, case, wrap, envelope, jacket; (Chr.) alb, surplice, rochet; incarnation │ افرنجي قميص (ifranjī) day shirt, upper shirt; النوم قميص q. an-naum night-gown
taqammuṣ تقمص and taqmīṣ تقميص
transmigration of souls, metempsychosis
 قمص qummuṣ pl. قمامصة qamāmiṣa archpriest, hegumen (Copt.-Chr.)
قمط qamaṭa u i (qamṭ) to swaddle (ه a baby); to fetter, shackle (ه s.o.); to dress, bandage ( ھ a wound) II do.
قمط qimṭ pl. اقماط aqmāṭ rope, fetter قمطة qamṭa a kind of kerchief (eg.) قماط qimāṭ pl. -āt, قمط qumuṭ, اقمطة
aqmiṭa swaddle, diaper
قمطر qamaṭr, qimṭar pl. قماطر qamāṭir 
receptacle for storing books; satchel
قمع qama’a a (qam’) to tame, curb, bridle, restrain, check, suppress, repress, subdue ( ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to hinder, prevent (ه عن s.o. from) II (eg.) to cut off the upper end (ھ of an okra) IV = I
قمع qam’ repression, suppression, curbing, prevention; taming, subdual, quelling, subjection
قمع qam’, qim’, qima’ pl. اقماع aqmā’ funnel; -- (pl. قموع qumū’) stem (of a fruit); pericarp │ الخياط قمع q. al-kayyāt thimble; السيكارة قمع cigar butt
قمقم qamqama and II تقمقم taqamqama to complain, grumble, mutter
قماقم pl. qumquma قمقمة and qumqum قمقم
qamāqim  a bulgy, long-necked bottle 790
قمل qamila a (qamal) to be lice-infested, teem with lice V do.
قمل qaml (coll.; n. un. ة) louse قمل qamil lousy, lice-infested مقمل muqammal lice-infested
  قمن V to intend, purpose, propose (ھ to do s.th.)
قمن gamin worthy, deserving (ب of s.th.)
قمين qamīn worthy (ب of), adequate (ب to), in keeping with (ب); fit(ting), appropriate, suitable (ب for), capable (ب of)
مقمن maqman adequate (ل to), appropriate, suited, suitable, fit (ل for)
 قمين qamīn and قمينة qamīna pl. -āt kiln, furnace
  قن qunn pl. قنان qinān chicken coop, chicken house
قن qinn pl. اقنان aqnān, اقنة aqinna slave, serf
قنة qinna galbanum (bot.)
قنة qunna pl. -āt, قنن qunan, قنان qinān,
قنون qunūn mountaintop, summit, peak
قنونة qunāna slavery, serfdom
قنينة qinnīna pl. قنان qanānin bottle, glass bottle; flask, flacon, vial
 قن II to make laws, legislate; to determine, fix (ھ s.th.)
قانون qānūn pl. قوانين qawānīn  canon; established principle, basic rule, axiom, norm, regulation, rule, ordinance, prescript, precept, statute; law; code; tax, impost; (Tun.) tax on olives and dates; a stringed musical instrument resembling the zither, with a shallow, trapezoidal sound box, set horizontally before the performer │ األساسي القانون (asāsī) basic constitutional law; statutes; التأسيس قانون statutes, constitution; الجنائي القانون (jinā’ī) criminal law, penal law; األحوال قانون الشخصية (šakṣīya) personal statute; القانون الدستوري (dustūrī) constitutional law; القانون الدولي (duwalī) international law; قانون المرافعات q. al-murāfa’āt code of procedure (jur.; Eg.); الحقوقية المحاكمات اصول قانون do. (syr.); اإلداري السلك قانون q. as-silk al-idārī administrative law; كيماوي قانون (kīmāwī) chemical formula; المدني القانون (madanī) civil law
قانوني qānūnī canonical; legal, statutory; lawful, legitimate, licit, accordant with law or regulations, valid, regular; legist, jurisprudent, jurist │ قانوني صيدلي (ṣaidalī) certified and licensed pharmacist; غير قانوني illegal
قانونية qānūnīya legality, lawfulness
 تقنين taqnīn legislation, lawmaking; codification (jur.); regulation by law; rationing
مقنن muqannin legislative, lawmaking; lawgiver, lawmaker, legislator
مقنن muqannan determined, fixed
قانئ qāni’ blood-red, deep-red
Canal Suez the قنال السويس │ canal qanāl قنال
قنب qanb pl. قنوب qunūb calyx
قنب qunnab, qinnab hemp (Cannabis indica; bot.) │ القنب خيط kaiṭ al-q. hemp rope, string, cord, twine, packthread
قنبي qinnabī hempen, hemp (adj.)
مقنب miqnab pl. مقانب maqānib  troop of horsemen
 قنبار qunbār (ir.) bast rug, bast runner
 قنبر qunbur (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. قنابر qanābir 
lark (zool.)
 قنبرة qunbura pl. قنابر qanābir  bomb
 قنبور qunbūr hump, hunch │ قنبور ابو abū qunbūr hunchback 791
قنباز qunbāz pl. قنابيز qanābīz  (syr.) a long, sleeved garment worn by men, open in front and fastened with a belt
qanābil  قنابل pl. qanbala قنبلة and qanbal قنبل  
troop of horsemen; troop, group, band
  قنبل qanbala to bomb (ھ s.th.)
قنبلة qunbula pl. قنابل qanābil  bomb, bomb shell; grenade, shell │ حارقة قنبلة incendiary bomb; ذرية قنبلة (darrīya) atomic bomb, A bomb; غازية قنبلة (gāzīya) gas bomb, gas shell; مائية قنبلة (mā’īya) depth charge; محرقة قنبلة (muḥriqa) incendiary bomb; منفجرة قنبلة (munfajira) high-explosive bomb; ھيدروجينية قنبلة (haidrōjīnīya) hydrogen bomb, H bomb; اليد قنبلة q. al-yad or يدوية قنبلة (yadawīya) hand grenade
bomber; muqanbila ṭā’ira طائرة مقنبلة
bombers مقنبالت
قنبيط qunnabīṭ cauliflower
قنت qanata u (قنوت qunūt) to be obedient, submissive, humble
قنوت qunūt obedience to God, humility before God, devoutness, piety
قنجة qanja pl. -āt, قناج qināj Nile boat
قند qand pl. قنود qunūd hard crystalline mass formed by evaporating or boiling cane sugar, candy
muqannad مقند and maqnūd مقنود
sweetened with qand
قندز qunduz and قندس qundus beaver
قندق qandaq pl. قنادق qanādiq  gunstock, rifle butt
قندلفت qandalaft pl. -īya sexton, sacristan (Chr.)
قندول qandūl aspalatus (bot.)
قنديل qindīl pl. قناديل qanādīl  lamp; candlestick; candelabrum
قنزعة qunza’a, qanza’a, qinzi’a pl. قنازع qanāzi’  tuft of hair; cock’s comb, crest of a rooster
قنص qanaṣa i (qanṣ) and VIII to hunt, shoot, bag (ھ s.th.); to hunt up (ھ s.th.), get hold (ھ of s.th.); to make use, take advantage, avail o.s. (الظروف of the circumstances, الفرصة al-furṣa of the opportunity, and the like)
قنص qanṣ hunting, shooting, hunt
قنص qanaṣ quarry, bag, game
قنيص qanīṣ game, quarry, bag, catch; hunter
قناص qannāṣ pl. قناصة qanāṣa hunter قانص qāniṣ pl. قناص qunnāṣ hunter  قانصة qāniṣa pl. قوانص qawāniṣ  gizzard O قانصة qāniṣa pl. -āt tank destroyer
(Syr.; mil.)
مقنوص maqnūṣ quarry, bag, catch
نائب │ consul qanāṣil  قناصل pl. qunṣul قنصل قنصل عام vice-consul; وكيل القنصل and القنصل general consul (‘āmm)
قنصلي qunṣulī consular
قنصلية qunṣulīya pl. -āt consulate │ عامة قنصلية (‘āmma) consulate general
قنصالتو qunṣulātō consulate
قنط qaniṭa a (qanaṭ), qanaṭa u i (قنوط qunūṭ) and qanuṭa u (قناطة qanāṭa) to despair, despond, become disheartened, be without hope, lose all courage II to drive to
 despair, dishearten, discourage (ه s.o.) IV do.
قنط qanaṯ and قنوط qunūṭ despair, despondency, desperateness, hopelessness
قنط qaniṭ and قنوط qanūṭ despairing, desperate, disheartened, discouraged
قانط qāniṭ despairing, desperate, despondent, disheartened, discouraged 792
  قنطر qantara to arch, span, vault (ھ s.th.)
قنطرة qantara pl. قناطر qanāṭir  arched bridge, stone bridge; vault, arch; archway, arcade; arches, viaduct, aqueduct (esp. pl.); dam, weir │ موازنة قنطرة regulator, regulating device (at a canal, esp. in the Egyptian irrigation system); الخيرية القناطر (kairīya) the Barrages, at the entrance of the Nile delta, about 15 miles north of Cairo
مقنطر muqanṭar vaulted, arched, arcaded
قنطر qanṭara to possess tremendous riches
قنطار qinṭār pl. قناطير qanāṭīr  kantar, a varying weight of 100 رطل raṭl (in Eg. =
44.93 kg, in Tunisia = 53.9 kg, in Syria =
256.4 kg) │ مقنطرة قناطير (muqanṭara) accumulated riches; tremendous sums
قنطاريون qinṭārīyūn centaury (Erythrea centauricum; bot.)
قنطرمة qanṭarma pl. -āt snaffle, bridoon
قنع qani’a a (qana’, قنعان qun’ān, قناعة qanā’a) to content o.s., be content, be satisfied (ب with); to be convinced II to mask (ھ the face); to veil (ھ the face, to a woman); to satisfy, content (ه s.o.), give satisfaction (ه to); to convince (ه ب s.o. of); to persuade ( ه s.o.) IV to content, satisfy (ه s.o.), give satisfaction (ه to); to convince (ه s.o.); to induce, persuade (ه ب s.o. to do s.th.), prevail (ه ب upon s.o. to do s.th.) V to mask or conceal one’s face; to veil one’s face, be veiled, wear a veil VIII to content o.s., be content (ب with); to be convinced ( ب of)
قنع qin‘ pl. اقناع aqnā‘ arms, weapons, armor
قنع qana‘ contentment, content, contentedness; frugality, moderation, temperance, abstemiousness
قناعة qanā‘a satisfaction; contentment, content, contentedness; frugality, temperance, moderation
قنع qani‘ satisfied, content, contented; temperate, moderate, abstemious
قناع qinā‘ pl. قنع qunu‘ arms, weapons, armor; -- (pl. اقنعة aqni‘a, also قناعات qinā‘āt) veil, head veil; mask; pericardium
│ واق قناع (wāqin) gas mask
قنوع qanū‘ pl. قنع qunu‘ satisfied, content (ب with); frugal, modest, temperate
مقنع maqna‘ sufficiency │ له مقنع ذلك في that is enough for him, he may content himself with that
اقناع iqnā‘ satisfying, satisfaction, contenting (of s.o.); persuasion; convincing, convincement, conviction
تقنع taqannu‘ mummery, masquerade
اقتناع iqtinā‘ satisfaction, contentment, content, contentedness; conviction (= convincedness)
قانع qāni‘ satisfied, content (ب with)
مقنع muqanna‘ veiled; masked
مقتنع muqtani‘ satisfied, content (ب with); convinced
قنفذ qunfud pl. قنافذ qanāfid  hedgehog │ قنفذ البحر q. al-baḥr or بحري قنفذ (baḥrī) sea urchin (Echinus; zool.); porcupine fish (Diodon; zool.)
قنقر qanqar kangaroo
قنال look up alphabetically
 قنم qanima a (qanam) to be or become rancid, rank
قنومة qannūma sacred fish (Mormyrus oxyrhynchus)
 اقنوم uqnūm pl. اقانيم aqānīm  hypostasis, person of the Trinity (Chr.); basic element, substance, subsistent principle 793
qanw, قنو( u qanā قني( قنا and )قنو to qunwān) قنوان qunwa, قنوة qunūw,
 acquire, appropriate, make one’s own (ھ s.th.); to possess, own, have (ھ s.th.); -- قنى qanā i (qany, قنيان qunyān) to acquire, gain (ھ s.th.); -- قني qaniya a (قنا qanan) to be hooked, aquiline (nose) II to dig (a canal) VIII to acquire (ھ s.th.); to get, procure, purchase (ھ s.th.)
قنو qunw, qinw pl. اقناء aqnā’, قنوان qunwān, qinwān, قنيان qunyān, qinyān bunch of dates
قنوة qunwa, qinwa appropriation, acquisition; property in livestock, wealth, fortune, possessions, property
قنية qunya, qinya acquisition, property
قناة qan`ah pl. قنى qanan, qunīy, قناء qinā’, قنوات qanawāt, قنيات qanayāt spear, (bamboo) lance; shaft; tube, duct, pipe; -- (pl. اقنية aqniya, قنوات qanawāt) canal; stream, waterway │ دمعية قناة (dam‘īya) lachrymal canal; العلم قناة q. al-’alam flagpole; قناته النت lānat qanātuhū to soften, relent; to yield, give in
قناية qanāya pl. -āt small stream, rivulet, runnel, canal
O قنية qunayya cannula
اقنى aqnā bent, curved, crooked, hooked
اقتناء iqtinā’ purchase, acquisition
قان qānin pl. قانية qāniya possessor, owner; see also alphabetically
muqtanayāt مقتنيات pl. muqtanan مقتنى
thing acquired, acquisition
قھر qahara a (qahr) to subject, subjugate, conquer, vanquish, defeat (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to subdue, overpower, overwhelm, overcome (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to force, compel, coerce (ه على s.o. to)
قھر qahr vanquishing, subdual, subjection, subjugation; compulsion, coercion, force; (eg.) annoyance, trouble, sorrow, grief; قھرا qahran forcibly, by force; perforce, of necessity
قھرة quhra compulsion, coercion, constraint, force
قھري qahrī compelling, compulsory, mandatory, coercive; forcible, forced │ قھرية ابتسامة forced smile; قھري سبب (sabab) compelling reason
قاھر qāhir forcible, cogent, overpowering, irresistible; vanquisher, conqueror, victor; القاھر the planet Mars
al- القاھرة or al-qāhira miṣr مصر القاھرة Cairo qāhira
قاھري qāhirī Cairene; (pl. -ūn) a Cairene
قھار qahhār conquering, vanquishing;
القھار the Subduer, the Almighty (God)
قھرمان qahramān pl. قھارمة qahārima steward, butler, household manager
قھرمانة qahramāna (woman) housekeeper
قھقر qahqara to move backward, go back, fall back, retreat, withdraw; to fall behind, lag behind; to recede, retrogress, retrograde, decline, degenerate, deteriorate II taqahqara do.
قھقرة qahqara backward movement, recedence, recession, retrogression, fall- back, retreat; decline, retrogradation, degeneration
قھقرى qahqarā backward movement, recedence, recession, retrogression, fallback, retreat; decline, retrogradation, degeneration │ القھقرى عاد to fall back, retreat, withdraw
تقھقر taqahqur regress, recession, recedence, retrogression, lag, fallback, retreat
قھقه qahqaha to laugh boisterously, guffaw
قھقھة qahqaha loud burst of laughter, guffaw, horselaugh 794
قھوة qahwa coffee; (pl. qahawāt and □ قھاوي qahāwī) cafe, coffeehouse │ سادة قھوة coffee without sugar
قھواتي qahwātī, qahawātī pl. -īya (syr.) coffeehouse owner
قھوجي qahwajī coffeehouse owner; coffee cook
مقاه pl. maqhāh مقھاة and maqhan مقھى
maqāhin cafe, coffeehouse
مقھاية maqhāya (yem.) cafe, coffeehouse
اقھى IV and (ṭa‘ām) قھي من الطعام a: qahiya قھي appetite little have to من الطعام
 قاه qāhin supplied with provisions
(قاب (قوب qāba u (qaub) to dig; to dig up, burrow, excavate, hollow out (ھ the ground) II do. V to break open, burst open (egg)
قاب qāb small distance; short span (between the middle and the end of a bow)
│ قوسين قاب على (q. qausain) quite near, very close; imminent; لمحة قاب على (q. lamḥa) in a moment
قوب qūb pl. اقواب aqwāb young bird, chick
قوباء qūbā’, quwabā’  and قوبة qūba, quwaba pl. قوب quwab tetter (med.)
(قات (قوت qāta u (qaut, qūt, قياتة qiyāta) to feed, nourish, subsist, sustain, support (ه s.o.), provide for the support (ه of) II and IV do. V to be fed, be supported; to feed, livo (ب on s.th.); to eat (ب s.th.) VIII do.; to take in or absorb as nourishment (ھ s.th.)
قات qāt kat (Catha edulis Forskàl; bot.); the leaves of this shrub which act as an excitant when chewed │ الرعيان قات q. ar- ru‘yān a variety of lettuce (Lactuca inermis Forsk.; bot.)
قوت qūt pl. اقوات aqwāt nutriment, aliment, nourishment, food, viands │ مواد القوت mawādd al-q. foodstuffs
تقوت taqawwut nutrition, alimentation
المقيت al-muqīt the Feeder, the Nourisher (God)
قوح) قاح) qāḥa u (qauḥ) to fester, suppurate, swell (wound); to sweep (ھ the house) II to sweep (ھ the house) III to quarrel, pick a quarrel V to fester, suppurate, swell
قاحة qāḥa pl. قوح qūḥ courtyard
قود) قاد) qāda u (quad, قياد qiyād, قيادة qiyada, مقادة maqāda) to lead, lead by a halter (ھ s.th.); to conduct, guide, engineer, steer (ھ s.th.); to drive, steer (ھ e.g., an automobile), pilot (ھ an airplane); to pander, pimp IV to cause (ه s.o.) to retaliate VII to be led, be guided; to follow, obey (ل s.o.), yield, submit (ل to s.o.) VIII to lead; to be led X to retaliate
قود qaud leadership; pandering, pimping
قود qawad retaliation
قواد qawwād pander, pimp, procurer
قؤود qa’ūd tractable, docile, amenable, manageable; trained (horse)
اقود aqwad  tractable, docile, amenable, manageable
قياد qiyād leadership, guidance; leading rope, halter │ القياد سلس salis al-q. tractable, docile, amenable, manageable, pliant; القياد صعب ṣa’b al-q. intractable, unruly, ungovernable
قيادة qiyāda leadership, guidance; driving, steering, steerage (of a vehicle); command │ العامة) العليا القيادة) (‘ulyā, ‘āmma) supreme command; القيادة عجلة ‘ajalat al-q. steering wheel (of an automobile)
مقود miqwad pl. مقاود maqawid leading rope, leading rein, halter; steering mechanism; steering wheel 795
انقياد inqiyād obedience, compliances, yielding, submission
قائد qā’id pl. قواد quwwād, قود quwwad, قادة qāda,  قادات qādāt leader; directors, manager; head, chief; commander, commandant; high-ranking officer, senior officer; caïd, native governmental officer heading a caïdate in Tunisia; steersman, helmsman │ الجيش قائد q. al-jaiš commander of an army, general; العام قائد (‘āmm) supreme commander; األعلى القائد (a’lā) commander-in-chief of the Eg. navy; الجوية األساطيل عام قائد (‘āmm, jawwīya) lieutenant general of the Air Force (Eg. 1939); الجوية األساطيل قائد (jawwīya) major general of the Air Force (Eg. 1939); الجوي اسطول قائد q. usṭūl jawwī colonel of the Air Force (Eg. 1939); قائد جوي لواء lieutenant colonel of the Air Force (Eg. 1939); جوية فرقة قائد q. firqa jawwīya major of the Air Force (Eg.
1939); جناح قائد q. janāḥ wing commander (Eg. 1939); سرب قائد q. sirb captain of the Air Force (Eg. 1939); الفكر قادة q. al-fikr leading thinkers
قور II to make a round hole (ھ in s.th.); to gouge, scoop out, hollow out (ھ s.th.); to cut out in a round form, cut round (ھ s.th.)
V	 اقتور and اقتار VIII (snake) coil to
iqtawara = II
قار qār pitch; tar
قارة qāra pl. -āt, قور qūr, قيران qīrān hill; see also qarra under; قر
مقورة miqwara gouge
تقوير taqwīr gouging, hollowing out تقويرة taqwīra neckline (of a garment) مقور muqawwar cut out in a round
form; gouged, hollowed out, scooped out; chiseled out; low-cut, low-necked, décolleté (dress)
قورمة qawurma (eg.) mutton or beef cut in small pieces and braised with squash (qar’) or onions and tomatoes
قوس qawisa a (qawas) to be bent, curved, crooked II = I; to bend, curve, crook (ھ s.th.); to shoot V = I; to bend
قوس qaus m. and f., pl. of اقواس aqwās, قسي qusīy, qisīy bow, longbow; arc (geom.); arch, vault (arch.; of a bridge); violin bows, fiddlestick; semicircular table; قوسان parentheses (punctuation marks); القوس Sagittas, the Archer (sign of the zodiac) │ قوسين بين (qausain) in parentheses; قزح قوس q. quzaḥa rainbow; الندف قوس q. an-nadf teasing bow (for combing or carding cotton); النصر قوس q. an-naṣr triumphal arch; صبري قوس في يبق لم منزع lam yabqa fī q. ṣabrī minz‘ my patience is at an end (lit.: there is no arrow left for the bow of my patience)
قواس qawwās bowmaker; bowman, archer; kavass, consular guard
قويسة quwaisa sage (bot.)
مقوس muqawwas bent, crooked, curved, arched
قوش qūš pl. اقواش aqwāš crupper (of the saddle or harness); straps, girth
قاووش qāwūš pl. قواويش qawāwīš  prison cell
qawwās قواس see qawāṣ قواص □
قوض) قاض) qāḍa u (qauḍ) to demolish, tear down, wreck, raze (ھ a building), strike ( ھ a tent) II do.; to break off (ھ s.th.); to smash (ھ s.th.) V to be demolished,
undergo demolition; to collapse, fall in, cave in; to break up, scatter, disperse (crowd); to desist (عن from), give in, give way (عن to)
تقويض taqwīḍ wrecking, demolition; destruction, annihilation
مقاوضة muqāwaḍa barter, exchange, interchange
  قوط qauṭ pl. اقواط aqwāṭ flock of sheep 796
  القوط al-qūṭ the Goths
قوطي qūṭī Gothic
  قوطة qauṭa small basket for fruit; date basket
 قوطة qūṭa (eg.) tomatoes
قوع) قاع) qā‘ pl. قيعان qī‘ān, اقوع aqwu‘, اقواع aqwā‘ plain, lowland; bottom, lowest part; wave trough (phys.); floor (of a mine); gulf, abyss │ النھر قاع q. an-nahr river bed; القاع بالد the Netherlands
قاعة qā‘a pl. -āt paved courtyard; entrance hall, vestibule, corridor; hall; sizable room │ المحاضرات قاعة q. al- muḥāḍarāt lecture hall, auditorium (of a university); التدريس قاعة lecture room, classroom; الطعام قاعة q. aṭ-ṭa‘ām dining room; messhall; العرش قاعة q. al-‘arš throne room; المطالعة قاعة q. al-muṭāla‘a reading room, study hall; األفراح قاعة banquet hall, ballroom
 قوق) قاق) qāqa u (qauq) to cackle, cluck (hen) II do.
قاق qāq pl. قيقان qīqān (syr.) raven │ قاق الماء cormorant (zool.)
قويق ام umm quwaiq (eg.) owl (zool.)
alphabetically up look قواويق pl. قاووق and قاوق  
القوقاز al-qauqāz and القوقاس al-qauqās the Caucasus
القوقازيون al-qauqāzīyūn the Caucasians
قوقع qauqa‘ seashell
قوقعة qauqa‘a pl. قواقع qawāqi‘  snail
 (قال (قول qāla u (قول qaul) to speak, say, tell (ھ s.th., ل to s.o.; ھ عن في، s.th. about or of), utter, voice (ھ s.th.); to speak (عن of), deal (عن with), treat (عن of); to state, maintain, assert, propound, teach, profess, advocate, defend (ب s.th.); to support, hold (ب a
 view), stand up (ب for), be the proponent ( ب of a doctrine or dogma); to allege (ب s.th.); with على: to speak against s.o., speak ill of s.o., tell lies about s.o. │ قال برأسه (bi-ra’sihī) to motion with the head, signal, beckon; المثل في قيل qīla fī l-matal the proverb says; ان يقال وال (inna) one cannot say that ..., let no one say that …; قل او au qul or, or rather, or say even …; في ھذه مثل وقل (wa-qul mitla) or في مثله وقل or في قل وكذلك the same must be said about
…, the same can be said of ..., the same applies to ... III to confer, parley, treat, negotiate (ه with s.o.); to dispute, wrangle, argue; to haggle, bargain (ه with s.o., about the price); to make a contract; to conclude a bargain, make a deal (ه with s.o.) V to fabricate lies, spread rumors ( على about s.o.); to pretend, allege, purport (ھ s.th.) │ األقاويل تقول (aqāwīla) to talk foolishly X O to render (voice by radio)
وقيل قال qāl wa-qīl and وقال قيل qīl wa- qāl long palaver; idle talk, prattle, gossip
al- sū’ سوء القالة │ talk speech, qāla قالة
q. malicious gossip, backbiting, defamation
قول qaul pl. اقوال aqwāl, اقاويل aqāwīl  word, speech, saying, utterance, remark; statement, declaration; report, account; doctrine, teaching; pl. اقوال also: testimony (in court); اقاويل sayings, locutions; proverbs │ وعمال قوال qaulan wa-‘amalan or والفعل بالقول (fi‘l) by word and deed; اقوال الشھود testimonies, depositions, evidence; قوله اعطى a‘ṭā qaulahū to make one’s bid (at an auction)
قولة qaula (n. vic.) utterance, remark, word; pronouncement, dictum
قولة quwala garrulous, voluble, loquacious, talkative, communicative
قوال qawwāl garrulous, voluble, loquacious, talkative, communicative; itinerant singer and musician 797
مقول miqwal pl. مقاول maqāwil  phonograph, gramophone, talking machine
مقال maqāl speech; proposition, contention, teaching, doctrine; article; treatise; piece of writing
مقالة maqāla pl. -āt article; essay; treatise; piece of writing │ افتتاحية مقالة (iftitāḥīya) editorial, leading article
مقاولة muqāwala talk, conversation, parley, conference; dispute; contract; settlement, arrangement, agreement; bargain, deal, transaction, undertaking │ بالمقاولة by the job, by the contract, by piece (work)
تقول taqawwul pl. -āt talk, rumor, gossip
قائل qā’il pl. قول quwwal saying, telling; teller, narrator; advocate, proponent (ب of s.th.)
مقول maqūl pl. -āt that which is said, utterance, saying; word(s), speech │ العشر المقوالت (‘ašr) the ten categories (philos.)
مقاول muqāwil contractor; building contractor
 قول (Turk. kol) qōl wing of an army, army corps; اغاسي قول (Turk. kol ağası) a military rank intermediate between those of captain and major, adjutant major (Egs.)
قولحة qaulaḥa pl. قوالح qawāliḥ  (eg.) cob (of corn, and the like)
قولنج qaulanj colic
قولون qolōn colon (anat.)
قوم) قام) qāma u (قومة qauma, قيام qiyām) to get up; to stand up, stand erect; to rise (also fig.: voices, noise, wind); عليه قام to rise or turn against s.o., revolt or rebel against s.o., attack s.o.; له قام to rise in honor of s.o.; to rise from the dead, be resurrected; to ascend; to set out, start out; to depart, leave (train); to betake o.s., go ( الى to); to stand; to remain standing; to be, exist, be existent; to be located, be situated, lie; to consist (ب in); to rest, be based, be founded (على on, also ب), be built (على on); to have for its (main) theme (على a problem; of a book, and the like); to begin (يفعل to do s.th.), start (يفعل doing s.th.); to make s.th. (ب) one’s business, concern o.s. (ب with), undertake, take upon o.s., perform, do, carry out, execute, accomplish, practice, exercise (ب s.th.); to stand up (ب for), support, advocate,
 endorse (ب s.th.); to be in charge (على of), manage, run, tend, guard, keep up, preserve (على s.th.); to take care (على of), attend (على to), watch (على over), look after s.th. (على); to cost, be worth (ب so and so much) │ على البرھان قام (burhān) proof had been furnished for; الحكم بأعباء قام (bi-a’bā’i l-ḥukm) to assume the burdens of government, take over power; باوده قام (bi-awadihī) to provide for s.o.’s needs, stand by s.o. in time of need; بدور قام (bi- daurin) to play a part; بشأنه قام (bi-ša’nihī) to take care of s.o., look after s.o., take
s.o. under one’s wing; بالمصاريف قام to defray the costs, pay the expenses; قام عليه بالواجب to do one’s duty; بوعده قام (bi- wa‘dihī) to keep one’s word; الحرب قامت ساق على (ḥarb) the war was or became violent, flared up; war broke out; الحق قام
(ḥaqq) truth became or was manifest; قامت الصالة (ṣalāh) the time of prayer has come; وساق قدم على قام (qadamin wa-sāqin) to become fully effective, be in full progress, be in full swing; واحد رجل قومة قاموا (qaumata rajulin) they rose to a man; تقم لم بعد قائمة له lam taqum lahū qā’imatun  ba‘du he was no longer able to put up any resistance, he was as good as finished; ال قائمة لألعداء تقوم there is no 798 resistance against the enemies; قيامته قامت (qiyāmatuhū) to get excited, get angry, become furious; all hell broke loose in it; من) ل قيامته قامت) to be upset, be shocked, be violently agitated by s.th.; وجھه في قام (wajhihī) to resist, oppose, defy s.o.; قام مقامه (maqāmahū) to replace s.o., substitute for s.o., deputize for s.o., take s.o.’s place; to serve as or instead of s.th., take the place of s.th., replace s.th.; منه قام مقامه to take the place of s.o. with s.o.; قام وقعد (wa-qa‘ada) to be in a state of great anxiety, be seriously upset, be very agitated; to be very alarmed (ل by s.th.); ال قعد وال قام not to be lasting and durable II to set upright, lift up, raise (ھ s.th.); to create, shape, form, arrange, set up (ھ s.th.); to straighten, make or put straight ( ھ s.th.); to arrange well, do properly (ھ s.th.); to put in order, fix, set going (ھ s.th.); to right, put to rights, rectify, correct, reform, amend (ھ s.th.); O to rectify (el.); to estimate, assess, appraise, value, rate (ھ ب s.th. at) │ بثمن يقوم ال lā
yuqawwamu bi-tamanin inestimable, invaluable, priceless III to resist, oppose (ه s.o.); to fight, combat (ھ s.th.); to raise objections, take issue, contend, argue (ه في with s.o. because of s.th.); to withstand (ه s.o.), hold out, hold one’s own (ه against), be on a par (ه with s.o.), equal, match (ه s.o.), measure up (ه to s.o.) │ يقاوم ال lā yuqāwamu irresistible IV to straighten, straighten out, make right or correct, put in order (ھ s.th.); to make (ه s.o.) rise; to resurrect, raise from the dead (ه s.o.); to lift up, elevate (ھ s.th.); to set up, raise, erect (ھ s.th.); to start, originate, found, call into being (ھ s.th.); to fix, determine ( ھ s.th.); to appoint, nominate, install (ه ه
s.o. as); على اقامه to put s.o. in charge of s.th., commission s.o. with the management of s.th.; to agitate, rouse, excite (ھ s.th.); to make brisk, enliven, animate (ھ the market); to hold (ھ a meeting, a ceremony, etc.), celebrate (ھ a festival), put on, stage, organize (ھ a celebration, a pageant, etc.), give (ھ a reception); to occupy o.s. constantly (على with); to abide, stay, remain, dwell, reside, live (على in); to dwell (على on), persist (على in), keep, stick (على to) │ اوده اقام (awadahū) to provide for s.o.’s needs, stand by s.o. in time of need; to support s.o., furnish s.o. with the means of subsistence; على الجلي البرھان اقام (burhāna
l-jalīya) to furnish the unmistakable proof for ..., dearly prove s.th.; الحجة اقام (ḥujjata) to protest, lodge a protest; ل حسابا اقام (ḥisāban) to render account to s.o.; to give one’s mind to s.o. or s.th., make s.o. or s.th. one’s concern; ان على الدليل اقام to  prove that ...; الدينية الشعائر اقام (dīnīya) to perform the liturgical rites; الصالة اقام (ṣalāta) to perform the ritual prayer; اقام العدل (‘adla) to administer justice, handle
the law; على القداس اقام (quddāsa) to read the Mass for s.o.; على (دعوى) قضية اقام (qaḍīyatan, da‘wā) to take legal action against s.o., sue s.o.; وزنا له اقام (waznan) to set great store by s.th., attach importance to s.th., make much of s.th.; وزن له يقام ال (yuqāmu, wazn) to be negligible, be of no consequence; مباراة اقام (mubārātan) to stage a contest; مقامه اقامه (maqāmahū) to make s.o. take the place of s.o. else, make
s.o. replace s.o. else. substitute s.o. for s.o.
 else; الحامي مقام نفسه اقام (nafsahū maqama l- ḥāmī) to pose as the protector; واقعده اقامه (wa-aq‘adahū) to upset s.o. seriously, throw s.o. in a state of violent emotion; اقام واقعدھا الدنيا (dunya wa-aq‘adahā) to move heaven and earth; to make a stir, create a sensation; قيامة له يقيم ال (qiyāmatan) he forestalls any resistance on his part X to rise, get up, stand up; to straighten up, draw o.s. up; to stand upright, stand erect; to be or become 799 straight; to be right, correct, sound, proper, in order; to keep, stick (في to s.th.) │ الكالم له استقام (kalāmu) he said the right thing about ..., he talked sense about ...
قوم qaum pl. اقوام aqwām fellow tribesmen, kinsfolk, kin, kindred; tribe, race, people, nation; people │ األقوام عالم ethnographer, ethnologist; ان قوم سيقول (inna) people will say ...
قومة qauma rising; uprising, revolt
قومي qaumī national; ethnic, racial; قوميات national traits; (pl. -īya) “goumier”, member of the native cavalry troops recruited from the local tribes in French North Africa
قومية qaumīya nationalism; nationality
قامة qāma stature, figure, build, frame (of a person); fathom (measure of length = 6 feet); stand, support, tripod
قيم qayyim valuable, precious; straight, right; caretaker, curator, custodian, superintendent; القيمة al-qayyima the true faith │ قيمة كتب (kutub) valuable books
قيمة qīma pl. قيم qiyam value, worth; size of an amount, amount, quantity; price │ ذو قيمة valuable; له قيمة ال (qīmata worthless
قيمي qīmī relating to the value, by the standard of value, according to the value; nonfungible (Isl. Law) │ قيمي مال nonfungible things, nonfungibles (Isl.
Law)
قوام qawām upright posture, erect bearing; straightness; stature, physique, build, frame; figure, body (of a person); rightness, properness, proper condition, normal state; strength, vigor, stamina; firmness, consistency; support, stay, prop; livelihood, living
قوام qiwām support, stay, prop; basis, foundation; stock, supply; sustenance, subsistence, livelihood │ اھله قوام q. ahlihī the provider, or supporter, of his family
قوام qawwām manager, director, superintendent, caretaker, keeper, custodian, guardian (على of s.th.)
قوامة qiwāma guardianship
قويم qawīm pl. قيام qiyām straight, upright, erect; correct, right, proper, sound, authentic; true (religion); firm, solid
قيام qiyām rising, getting up; standing; existence; outbreak (e.g., of a revolt); setting out, leaving, departure (also, esp., of trains); performance. execution, carrying out, consummation, discharge, accomplishment, undertaking (ب of s.th.); support, stay, prop; sustenance, subsistence, livelihood │ الساعة قيام الى till doomsday, forever and ever, in perpetuity, for all time to come; اھله قيام q. ahlihī the provider, or supporter, of his family; القيام بالعمل (‘amal) performance; working, functioning
قيامة qiyāma resurrection; tumult, turmoil, upheaval, revolution, overthrow; guardianship │ القيامة عيد ‘īd al-q. Easter; القيامة يوم yaum al-q. the day of resurrection, the day of final judgment; قيامته قامت (qiyāmatuhū) to get excited, get angry, become furious; all hell broke loose in it; (ل قيامته قامت (عن to be upset, be shocked, be violently agitated by s.th.
القيوم al-qayyūm the Everlasting, the Eternal (God)
اقوم aqwam  straighter; more correct, sounder; more adequate, more appropriate
مقوم miqwam plowtail, plow handle
مقام maqām pl. -āt site, location, position; place, spot, point, locality; situation; station; standing, position, 800 rank, dignity; tomb of a saint, sacred place; key, tonality, mode (mus.) │ ھذا في المقام on this occasion; ابراھيم مقام small building near the Kaaba, in Mecca (housing a stone with Abraham’s foot- prints); الحديث مقام topic of the conversation; الرسمية) السياسية المقامات)
 (siyāsīya, rasmīya) the political (official) agencies; الكسر مقام m. al-kasr denominator of a fraction; الرفيع المقام صاحب title conferred upon the holder of the order of “Collier Fouad I”, established by Fuad I in 1936; والدي مقام في عندي كان (m. wālidī) he assumed the responsibility of fatherhood for me; cf. also muqām and under قم
مقامة maqāma pl. -āt sitting, session, meeting; a genre of Arabic rhythmic prose
تقويم taqwīm pl. تقاويم taqāwīm  raising, setting up, erection; appraisal, assessment, estimation, fating, valuation; correction; rectification, amendment, reform, reformation, reorganization, reshaping, modification, adaption; a rectification, detection (el., radio); land survey, surveying; determination of geographical longitude and latitude; geography; stocktaking; almanac; calendar; chronology │ الجويجوري التقويم the Gregorian calendar; زمني تقويم (zamanī) chronology; البلدان تقويم علم ‘ilm t. al-buldān geography
مقاومة muqāwama resistance; opposition; fight, struggle, battle (with foll. genit.: against); O resistance (el.) │ O جوية مقاومة (jawwīya) antiaircraft defense; سلبية مقاومة (salbīya) passive resistance; دون مقاومة without resistance, unresistingly
اقامة iqāma raising, lifting up; elevation; setting up; erection; establishment (of an institute); execution; performance; holding, convocation (e.g., of a meeting), celebration (e.g., of a festival), putting on, staging (e.g., of a pageant, of a celebration); resurrection (of the dead); stay, sojourn; second call to the salat in a mosque, indicating the imminent beginning of the prayer; (Magr.) residentship, office of resident │ اقامة
الدينية الشعائر (dīnīya) performance of the religious ceremonies, celebration of the divine service; العدل اقامة i. al-‘adl administration of justice; اإلقامة محل maḥall al-i. (place of) residence, domicile; address
استقامة istiqāma straightness; sincerity, uprightness, rectitude, integrity, probity, honesty; rightness, soundness, correctness
قائم qā’im pl. قوم quwwam, قيم quyyam, قوام quwwām, قيام quyyām rising, getting up; standing; upright, erect; stand-up; existing, existent; visible, conspicuous; firm, steadfast, staunch, unflinching, unshakable; revolting, rebelling (على against); vertical, perpendicular (على to) │ المفوضية بأعمال قائم باألعمال، قائم (bi-a. al- mufawwāḍīya) charge d’affaires (dipl.); برأسه قائم بذاته، قائم الذات، قائم (bi-ra’sihī) and بنفسه (bi-nafsihi) self-existent, independent; حياته قائم في (q. ḥayātihi) during his lifetime; الزاوية قائم q. az-zāwiya rectangular, right-angled; القائمة الزاوية right angle
قائممقام qā’im-maqām, qā’imaqām administrative officer at the head of a qaḍā’, approx.: district president (Ir., Syr., Leb.); lieutenant colonel (mil.; Tun., formerly also Eg.); commander (naval rank; Eg.)
قائممقامية qā’im-maqāmīya, qā’imaqāmīya administrative district headed by a qā’im-maqam, in Iraq = qaḍā’
قائمة qā’ima pl. قوائم qawā’im leg, foot, paw (of a quadruped); leg, foot (of furniture); pale, stake, post, prop, stanchion, pillar; pommel (of a sword’s hilt); stand, base, support; (fig.) main support, pillar; (pl. also -āt) list, roster, 801 register, index, table, schedule; catalogue; invoice, bill │ الطعام قائمة q. aṭ- ṭa‘ām menu, bill of fare; see also قوم I
مقوم muqawwim estimator, appraiser, assessor; -- (pl. -āt) formative element, constituent factor; O rectifier, detector (el., radio); pl. مقومات elements, constituents, components, formative agents, basic factors, fundamentals │ الحياة مقومات m. al-ḥayāh means of subsistence; earthly possessions; مقومات الجمال  m. al-jamāl cosmetics; العمران m. al-‘umrān cultural factors
مقوم muqawwam highly creditable, valuable, valued, treasured, prized; pl. مقومات valuable possessions, valuables; assets, values
مقاوم muqāwim resisting, resistent, reluctant, averse, unwilling; opponent, adversary, antagonist
 مقيم muqim raising, lifting up, setting up, erecting, etc. j remaining, staying, abiding, lingering; permanent, lasting, enduring; persistent; living, residing, resident, domiciled; re8ident (dipl.) │ مقيم بواجباته (bi-wājibātihī) dutiful, conscientious, loyal; عام مقيم (āmm) Resident General (Tun.)
مقيمي muqīmī residential
مقيمية muqīmīya residentship, residency
مقام muqām raised, set up, erected, etc.; pending (legal action); stay, sojourn; abode, habitat, whereabouts; place of residence; duration of stay; see also under قم
مستقيم mustaqīm upright, erect; straight; dead straight, straight as a die; directed straight ahead; correct, right, sound, proper, in order; even, regular, symmetrical, proportionate, harmonious; honest, straightforward, upright, righteous, honorable; (pl. -āt) a straight, straight line (math.); reotum (anat.)
قومسير (Fr. commissaire) qomisēr
commissioner
قومندان (Fr. commandant) qomandān
commander, commandant
قونة qūna pl. قون quwan icon; image of a saint
قونية qōniya  Konya (city in Anatolia)
قوه II to shriek, scream, yell, cry, shout
قوي qawiya a (قوة qūwa) to he or become strong, vigorous, forceful, mighty; to become stronger, increase in power, gain ascendancy; to be able to do s.th. (على in or about s.th.), have influence (على over s.th.); to he able to cope (على with s.th.), be able to manage or tackle (على s.th.); to be superior (على to s.o.); -- (قي qiyy, قواية qawāya) to he depopulated, deserted, forsaken, desolate (place); -- (قوى qawan) to starve, be starved; to be denied, he withheld (rain) II to make strong or vigorous, strengthen, fortify, consolidate, invigorate, brace (ه ,ھ s.o., s.th.); to encourage, hearten, embolden (ه s.o.); to intensify (ھ s.th.) III to vie or compete in strength (ه with s.o.); to equal, match (ه s.o.) IV to be poor; to be empty, deserted, forsaken, desolate (place) V to be or
become strong; to intensify, become stronger; to take heart, take courage VIII to claim for o.s. (ھ s.th.) X = V
قواء qawā’, qiwā’ and قي qiyy desert, wasteland, desolate country
قواء qawā’ and قوى qawan hunger, starvation
قوة qūwa pl. -āt, قوى quwan strength; vigor; potency; power, force; intensity; violence, vehemence; courage, pluck; faculty, ability, capability, aptitude; efficacy, efficiency, potential; O (electric) energy, power, capacity, output; armed force, troop; قوات qūwāt armed forces; troops│بالقوة forcibly, by force;  802 inherently, virtually (philos.); وجالء بقوة bi- qūwatin wa-jalā’in (to speak) loud and distinctly; القوة منسرق munsariq al-q. weakened, debilitated, effete, exhausted, spent; احتياطية قوة (iḥtiyāṭīyaī) reserves (mil.); اإلذاعة قوة q. al-idā‘a transmitting power (radio); اإلرادة قوة q. al-irāda will power; االستمرار قوة inertia; حافظة قوة memory; الحدود قوة frontier guard, border guard; خفيفة قوة light, mobile task force (mil.); O كھربائية دافعة قوة (kahrabā’īya) electromotive force, e.m.f.; دفاعية قوة (difā‘īya) total defense potential; O قوة سطحية (saṭḥīya) surface task force (navy); الشراء قوة purchasing power; الصوت قوة q. aṣ-ṣaut volume, intensity (radio) عاقلة قوة intellectual power, faculty of perception; عراك قوة combat force; العمل على قوة (‘amal) working power; output capacity; القانون قوة legal force; قاھرة قوة force majeure; قوة مركزية (markazīya) central power; O قوة جاذبة مركزية centripetal force; O مركزية قوة طاردة centrifugal force; للطائرات مضادة قوة (muḍādda) antiaircraft defense; معنوية قوة (ma‘nawīya) moral strength, morale, spirit; قوة q. an-nabt germinative faculty; نظامية قوة (niẓāmīya) regular army; برية قوات وجوية وبحرية (barrīya wa-baḥrīya wa- jawwīya) ground, sea, and air forces; العاب القوى athletics, specif., track and field
قوي qawīy pl. اقوياء aqwiyā’  strong; vigorous; potent; mighty, powerful, forceful; intense, violent, vehement i firm, solid, robust, hardy, sturdy │ العارضة قوى eloquent, quick, witted
اقوى aqwā stronger
 تقوية taqwiya strengthening; fortification, consolidation; intensification; encouragement
□ تقاوي taqāwī (eg.) seed (for sowing)
اقواء iqwā’ depopulation; imperfect rhyme (change of the vowel following the rhyme letter)
مقو muqawwin strengthening, fortifying, invigorating; corroborant; (pl. مقويات muqawwiyāt) a restorative, tonic, cordial, corroborant; O amplifier (radio)
مقوى muqawwan strengthened, reinforced, stiffened, stiff│مقوى ورق (waraq) cardboard, pasteboard
قوى see qiyy قى
(قاء (قىء qā’a i (قيء qay’) to vomit II to cause (
ه s.o.) to vomit (of an emetic) V = I
قياء quyā’ vomit, that which is vomited
مقيئ muqayyi’ pl. مقيئات muqayyi’āt a vomitive, an emetic│ المقيئ الجوز (jauz) nux vomica
قيثارة and qītār قيثار qayātīr , قياتير pl. qītār قيتار
qītāra pl. قياثير qayātīr , a guitar; lyre
(قيح (قاح qāḥa i (qaiḥ) to suppurate, fester, be purulent II and V do.
قيح qaiḥ pl. قيوح quyūḥ pus, matter
تقيح taqayyuḥ suppuration, maturation, purulence
متقيح mutaqayyiḥ suppurative, festering, purulent
 قيد II to bind, tie, fetter, shackle (ه ب s.o. with; also fig.: to bind or tie s.o. to); to limit, restrict, confine, qualify (ھ s.th.); to impose restrictions (ه ھ، on s.o., on s.th.), set bounds (ه ھ، to s.o., to s.th.), curb, check (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to fix, determine, lay down, specify, stipulate (ھ s.th.); to write, write down, note down (ھ s.th.), make a note, take notes (ھ of) ; to enter, book (ھ s.th.) ; to register, record (ھ s.th., also fig., of the eyes); to enroll (ه s.o., in a list or register); to charge (ھ على s.th. to s.o.,s account), debit (ھ على with s.th. s.o.); to place s.th. (ھ) to s.o.’s credit (ل), credit (ھ ل with s.th. s.o.) V pass. Of II; to bind o.s., be bound (ب to, by, e.g., by an
obligation); 803 to be limited, restricted; to enroll, have one’s name registered
قيد qaid pl. قيود quyūd (also اقيادaqyād) fetter, shackle, chain; bond, tie; strap, thong; recording, record, booking, entering, entry, registering, registration, registry; enrollment (e.g., at matriculation); fixation, determination, specification, stipulation; document; limitation, confinement, restriction, qualification, reservation; condition, proviso; amount, measure, degree; distance│االسنان قيد gum(s); االنساب قيد genealogical tree; family tree; او قيد غير من روابط without any reservation, without qualification; شرط وال قيد بال (šarṯ) without any reservation, without qualification; with no strings attached; unconditional; قلم القيودات qalam al-quyūdāt bureau of vital statistics, (G.B.) (general) register office; الحياة بقيد bi-q. il-ḥayāh or الحياة قيد على (still) alive, living; شعرة قيد qaida ša‘ratin, by a hairbreadth, within 80 hair’s breadth; ... ال انملة قيد la ... qaida unmulatin not one inch, not one iota; معدودة ساعات قيد على (q. sā‘atin) within a few hours; عشرة قيد على كيلومترات at a distance of 1o km; قيد عن البصر (q. il-baṣar) within sight
قيد qaida (prep.) under subject to, the object of, in the process of, in the stage of│ الدرس قيد المشروع (dars) the project is being studied, is under consideration; البحث قيد المسألة (mas’ala, baḥt) the affair is subject to investigation, is being investigated
قيدى qaidī booking-, registration, (in compounds), e.g., قيدية رسوم booking fees, registration fees
تقييد taqyīd pl. –āt, تقاييد taqāyīd  fattering, shackling, tying, binding; reservation, qualification; limitation, restriction, confinement, curtailment; entry, registry, registration, booking│تقييد النسل t. an-nas1 birth control; التقييد رسم rasm al-t. registration fee
تقيد taqayyud pl. -āt a being bound, obligation, tie, bond; restriction, limitation, confinement
مقيد muqayyad fettered, shackled, bound, tied, tied down; limited, restricted, confined; booked, registered│مقيد غير
 unlimited, unrestricted; مقيد ملك (mulk)
constitutional monarchy
قود see قيادة and قياد 
قير II to tar, pitch (ھ s.th.)
قار qār end قير qīr tar; pitch
قيراط qīrāṯ pl. قراريط qarārīt  inch; a dry measure (Eg. = 1/33 ٠.٤٦٠ = قدح l); a square measure (Eg. = 1/24 ٥٧١.٥٣٠ = فدان m ); karat, a weight (Eg. = 1/16 = درھم ٠.٥٩١ g)
قيروان qairawān pl. -āt caravan
القيروان al-qairawān Kairouan (city in NE Tunisia)
(قاس (قيس qāsa i (qais, قياس qiyās) to measure, gauge, measure out (ھ s.th.), take the measurements (ھ of); to try on (ھ a garment); to weigh, judge (ھ s.th., على ب، by analogy with s.th. else), drew analogous conclusions (على from s.th., ھ for s.th. else); to compare, correlate, bring into relation (على or ھ ب s.th. with, also الى ھ), proportion (على or y ھ s.th. to, also الى عليه وقس│(ھ wa-qis ‘alaihī end so forth II to measure (ھ s.th.) III to compare (بين الشيئين between two things, ھ s.th., الى or ب with or to) VIII to measure (ھ s.th.); to imitate, follow (ب s.o.), take after s.o. (ب)
قياس qiyās pl. -āt, اقيسة aqyisa measure, measurement, dimension; scale; exemplar, example; reference, relation; record (athlet.); comparison; analogy; deduction by analogy│ذلك على قياسا by analogy (with it), analogously (to it); correspondingly; الى بالقياس in comparison with, (as) compared to; in proportion to, in relation 804 with; with reference to, with respect to, with regard to; القياس على by analogy; regular; after the model, accordant with the model; قياس بغير illogical; قياسه أخذ to take s.o.’s measure (tailor); القياس متناسب mutanāsib al-q. fitting together, well matched; equal in proportion, commensurate, commensurable; عالمى قياس (‘ālamī) world record; فاسد قياس wrong inference, false conclusion, fallacy, sophism, paralogism; القياس شريط tape measure, tapeline
قياسى qiyāsī accordant with analogy, analogous; consistent with the model,
pattern, rule, or norm; comparable, by comparison; logical│قياسى رقم (raqm) record (athlet.)
قياس qayyās land surveyor, geodesist
مقياس miqyās pl.  مقاييس maqāyīs  measure, measurement; amount, quantity, magnitude; measuring instrument, gauge, water gauge, tide gauge; scale (e.g., of a map); standard; standard of judging, criterion; unit of measure; المقياس Nilometer│ المقياس تحت substandard; O التيار مقياس m. at-tayyār ammeter; O مقياس الجھد m. al-jahd voltmeter; O الحرارة مقياس
مقياس الزلزال O thermometer; al-ḥarāra m.
m. az-zalāzil seismograph, seismometer; O الزوايا مقياس m. az-zawāyā protactor; O الكھربائية مقياس m. al-kahrabā’īya electrometer; O المطر مقياس m. al-maṯar rain gauge, pluviometer, ombrometer, ombrograph; O المغنطيسية مقياس m. al- magnaṯīya magnetometer; التنفس مقياس m. at-tanaffus spirometer; االطوال مقاييس measures of length, linear measures; مقاييس المسطحات m. al-musaṯṯaḥāt square measures; O السطوح مقاييس do.; الحجم مقاييس
m. al-ḥajm cubic measures; الكيل مقاييس m. al-kail measures of capacity, dry measures, liquid measures
مقاسmaqās pl. –āt measuring, mensuration; gauging; measurement, dimension, size; pl. مقاساتdimensions
مقايسة muqāyasa measuring, mensuration, gauging; comparison; appraisal, valuation, estimation by analogy; (preliminary) estimate (of coots); relation, rate, rates, proportion; detailed listing, specification; itemized list (of services, quantities, prices)
qayāsira قياسرة qayāsir , قياسر pl. qaisarī قيسرى
big, large, huge, enormous
قيسرية qaisarīya  Caesarea (ancient seaport in Palestine)
قياسرية qayāsirīya pl. قياسر qaysir  large block of public buildings with stores, workshops, etc., roofed market place, bazaar; qaisarīya  Caesarea (ancient seaport in Palestine)
قايش pl. قوايش look up alphabetically
قيشانى qīšānī faience; porcelain, china
 قيصانة qaiṣāna sunfish, moonfish
qayāṣiraقياصرة  qayāṣir , قياصر pl. qaiṣar قيصر
Caesar; emperor, kaiser; tsar
قيصرى qaiṣarī Caesarean; imperial; tsarist│ القيصرية العملية (‘amalīya) Caesarean section (med.)
قيصرية qaiṣarīya kaiserdom, Caesarism, imperialism, empire; imperial dignity; tsarism; Caesarean section (med.); large lock of public buildings with stores, workshops, etc., roofed marked place, bazaar; Caesarea (ancient seaport in Palestine)
قيض) قاض) qaḍā i (qaiḍ) to break, crack, split, cleave, burst open (ھ s.th); to get broken, crack, burst; to exchange (ھ من s.th. for) II to foreordain, destine (ھ ل s.th. to s.o.; of God); to lead, send (ه s.o., ل to s.o; of God) III to exchange, give in exchange (ب ه ھ to s.o. s.th. for) V and VII to burst, crack, get broken, break; to collapse, fall in, cave in, tumble down 805
قيض qaiḍ eggshell; barter, exchange; article of exchange, barter object, equivalent
قياض qiyāḍ barter, exchange
مقايضة muqāyaḍa barter, exchange; barter trade, bartering; trading, barter (Isl. Law); compensation, barter transaction, barter deal
قطن see قيطان
قيطوس qīṯūs Cetus (astron.)
قيظ qaiẓ heat of summer; high summer, mid- summer, dog days; lack of rain, drought, aridity│ النھار قيظ q. an-nahār daytime heat
مقيظ maqīẓ summer residence
قائظqā’iẓ scorchingly hot, midsummery, canicular
قيف II to follow (ھ s.o.’s tracks); to study, examine, investigate (ھ s.th.); to criticize ( ھ s.th.)
قيافة qiyāfa tracking, pursuit (of a track); make-up, guise, costume
قيقب qaiqab maple (bot.)
  قيل) قال) qāla i (qail,  قائلة qā’ila,  قيلولةqailūla, قيل qīl) to take a midday nap; to hold siesta
II do. IV to abolish, repeal, annul (ھ s.th.); to cancel, abrogate, rescind, revoke (ھ s.th., esp. a sale); to depose, dismiss, discharge (ھ s.o.; also with المنصب من min al-manṣib from his office); to free, release, exempt (ه s.o., من from an obligation)│عثرتك ﷲ اقال (‘atrataka) may God regard your offence as undone; اقاله عثرته من (‘atratihī) to steady one who has stumbled X to demand the cancellation, seek the abrogation (ھ of a sale); to ask (ه s.o.) for exemption, release, or annulment; to request to be released from office, tender one’s resignation, resign (من or عن from an office); to resign one’s commission, quit the service; to ask s.o.’s (ه) pardon, apologize (ه to s.o.)
قيل qail pl. اقيال aqyāl princeling; chief, chieftain
قيلولة qailūla siesta; midday nap
مقيل maqīl resting place, halting place
اقالة iqāla cancellation, abrogation, rescission, revocation (esp. of a sale); abolishment, abolition, repeal, annulment; deposition, dismissal, discharge from an office
استقالة istiqāla resignation, withdrawal (from office); retirement
قائلة qā’la midday nap; noon, midday
مستقيل mustaqīl resigned from office, retired, discharged
  قيلة qīla, مائية قيلة (mā’īya) hydrocele (med.)
قوم see قيوم and قيام، قيمة، قيم
قين qain pl. قيون quyūn blacksmith
قينة qaina pl. -āt, قيان qiyān songstress, singer; lady’s maid
مقينة muqayyina lady’s maid
ك

ك ka (with foll. genit.) as, like; all but, as good as; as, in my (your, etc.) capacity of │ كاألول ka-l-awwali as before, as at the beginning, as from the outset; كھذا ka-hādā such, e.g., كھذا رجل rajulun kahādā such a man, a man like this; ذلك على كالمجمعين ھم (ka-l-mujmi‘īna) they are as good as
 unanimous about it, they are 806 practically agreed on it; كمسلم انا anā kamuslimin I (in my capacity) as a Muslim
كأن ka-anna (conj. introducing a nominal clause) as if, as though; it is (was) as if │ بھا كأني ka-annī bihā (with imperf.) it is like seeing her before me; I am under the impression that she …, it looks to me as if she ...
كذا ka-dā so, thus, that way; so and so, such and such, so-and-so much, so-and-so many │ مكذا كذا so and so, such and such, so-and-so much, so-and-so many; وكذا
كذا بمكان bi-makāni k. at such and such a place; سنوات كذا عمره ‘umruhū k. sanawāt his age is so-and-so many years
كذلك ka-dālika so, like this, thus; equally; likewise
كما ka-mā (conj. introducing a verbal clause) as, just as, as also, as on the other hand; (introducing a main clause) equally, likewise, as well │ ان كما ka-mā anna (introducing a nominal clause) as, just as quite as, as also, as on the other hand; كما ھو such as it is; as things are, such being the matter; حاضرا كان لو كما if as if he were present
الكاب مدينة madīnat al-kāb Cape Town
كئب ka’iba a (كأب ka’b, كأبة ka’ba, كآبة ka’āba) to be dejected, dispirited, downcast, sad ( على about, ل because of), be worried (ل by, because of) IV to sadden, aggrieve, distress, worry (ه s.o.); to depress, dishearten, discourage (ه s.o.) VIII to be dejected, dispirited, downcast, sad (على about, ل because of), be worried (ل by, because of); to be gloomy
كأب ka’b, كأبة ka’ba, كآبة ka’āba and اكتئاب ikti’āb sorrow, grief, distress, sadness, dejection, depression, gloom, melancholy
كئب ka’ib and كئيب ka’īb sad, dispirited, dejected, downcast, depressed, melancholy; gloomy, morose; grave
مكتئب mukta’ib sad, dispirited, dejected, downcast, depressed, melancholy; gloomy, morose; grave; dark-colored, blackish, dismal
 كابل (Fr. cable) kabil cable
 كابل kābul  Kabul (capital of Afghanistan)
ابلي kābūlī Kabuli, of Kabul; (eg.) mahogany wood
كباين kabā’in , كبائن pl. kābīn cabine) (Fr. كابين
kabāyin  cabin
كاتدرائية kātidrā’īya cathedral
كاثوليكي kātūlīkī Catholic; a Catholic; see also
كثلك
كاخية kākiya pl. كواخ kawākin butler, steward
 كاد kād anacardium (bot.) │ ھندي كاد (hindī) cashew tree (Anacardium occidentale; bot.)
 كأد ka’ada a to be sad, distressed, worried
كأداء ka’dā’  sadness, sorrow, distress, grief; fear; dark night │ كأداء عقبة (‘aqaba) insurmountable obstacle
كؤود ka’ūd: كؤود عقبة (‘aqaba) insurmountable obstacle
كادر (Fr. cadre) kādir cadre (of a military unit, of a governmental agency, of a corporation, etc.), skeleton organization, skeleton unit, skeleton crew (of a naval unit)
كادميوم kadmiyom cadmium
كار kār pl. -āt work, job, occupation, business; calling, vocation, profession, trade │ كار ابن ibn k. (eg.) artisan, craftsman; الكارات ارباب artisans, craftsmen; الكار عداوة ‘adāwat al-k. professional jealousy, trade rivalry 807
كارتون kartōn cardboard, pasteboard; (pl. -āt) carton
cardinal karādila كرادلة pl. kardīnāl كاردينال
curry karrī كارى = كرى
كاريكاتورية karīkātūrīya caricature, cartoon
gas gāz كاز = غاز
casino kāzīnōhāt كازينوھات pl. kāzīnō كازينو
كأس ka’s f., pl. كؤوس ku’ūs, كئاس ki’ās, كأسات ka’sāt cup; drinking glass, tumbler; goblet; chalice, calix; calyx (bot.)
كساتا kāsātā cassata (Italian ice cream)
كاغط kāgiṭ (mor.) paper
 كاف kāf name of the letter ك
كافور kāfūr camphor, camphor tree; (eg.) blue gum (Eucalyptus globulus Lab.; bot.)
كاكنج kākinj, kākanj alkekengi, ground cherry (Physalis alkekengi; bot.)
كالو (It. callo) kallō pl. كالوھات corn (on the toes)
كالون gālōn gallon; -- (eg.) kālūn and كيلون
kailūn pl. كوالين kawālīn  lock (of a door)
كواليني kawālīnī pl. -ya locksmith
كامبوديا kambōdiyā Cambodia
كامبيو (It. cambio) kombiyō rate of exchange
كامخ kāmak, kāmik pl. كوامخ kawāmik  vinegar sauce, pickle; (mixed) pickles
كاميرا kāmērā camera
كاميه kāmīh cameo (precious stone)
الكانتو سوق sūq al-kantō rag fair, secondhand market
كانتين kantīn post exchange, canteen
كاھية kāhiya pl. كواه kawāhin chief officer of a كھاية kihāya (Tun.); deputy, vice-, under-, sub- (Tun.)
كاوتشق kautšuq rubber, caoutchouc
كب kabba u (kabb) to prostrate, throw prostrate (لوجھه li-wajhihī or ه وجھه على s.o.); to overturn, overthrow, topple, upset, capsize, turn upside down, revert, invert ( ھ s.th.); to pour out, pour away (ھ a liquid) II to ball, roll or form into a ball, conglomerate (ھ s.th.) IV to throw down, prostrate, bend down, bow down (ه s.o.); to throw o.s. down, prostrate o.s.; to bend, bow, lean (على over s.th.); to apply o.s. eagerly, devote o.s., dedicate o.s. (على to s.th.) VII to fall prostrate (وجھه على); to throw o.s. down, prostrate o.s.; to bend, bow, lean (على over); to apply o.s. eagerly, devote o.s., dedicate o.s. (على to); to nestle (على against); to be reverted, be inverted, be overturned, be upset, be toppled, get knocked over; to be poured away │ انكب قدميه على (qadamaihi) to throw o.s. at s.o.’s feet, prostrate o.s. before s.o.
كب kabb prostration; overthrow, overturn, reversal; bending, tilting, inclination
كبة kubba pl. كبب kubab ball; clew, hank; ball of thread, hank of yarn; (syr., ir.) a kind of meatballs made of bulgur, onions, minced meat and piñons; (eg.) bubo, plague boil
كباب kabāb fried or broiled meat; cabobs, meat roasted in small pieces on a skewer; a kind of meatballs made of finely chopped meat (syr., eg.) │ صيني كباب (ṣīnī; eg.) cubeb (Piper cubeba Tr.; bot.)
كبابة kabāba, kubāba cubeb (Piper cubeba; bot.)
كبيبة (eg.) kubēba a kind of meatballs, hamburgers │ بطاطس كبيبة (eg.) baked potato dough stuffed with minced meat, meat patties
□ كباية kubbāya pl. -āt drinking glass, tumbler 808
مكب mikabb pl. -āt, مكاب makābb  ball of thread, hank of yarn; reel of thread, bobbin, spool, reel
اكباب ikbāb devotion, dedication (على to s.th.); occupation (على with), pursuit (على of)
انكباب inkibāb devotion, dedication (على to s.th.); occupation (على with), pursuit ( على of)
مكب mukibb devoted, dedicated, addicted, given over (على to), intent (على on), wholeheartedly engaged (على in)
منكب munkabb devoted, dedicated, addicted, given over (على to), intent (على on), wholeheartedly engaged (على in)
كباريه (Fr. cabaret) kabārēh pl. -āt cabaret
 كبت kabata i (kabt) to put down, crush, suppress, repress, stifle, subdue, restrain, curb (ھ s.th.) │ جوفه في غيظه كبت (gaiẓahū fī jaufihī) to suppress one’s anger; كبت انفاسه (anfāsahū) to get s.o. out of breath
كبت kabt suppression, repression
 كبوت kabbūt pl. كبابيت kabābīt  hood, cowl; hooded mantle; top of a carriage or automobile
كبتولة kabtūla lump, chunk; ball; pellet
مكبتل mukabtal round
كبتن (Engl.) kabtan captain (military rank)
 كبح kabaḥa a (kabḥ) to rein in (ھ a horse); to check, curb, control (ھ s.th.); to hamper, hinder, prevent, detain, restrain, hold back (ه عن s.o. from) │ جماحه كبح (jimāḥahū) to curb s.o.’s defiance, repress s.o. or s.th.
كبح kabḥ curbing, checking, subdual, restraint, control; suppression, repression; hindering, prevention
O مكبح mikbaḥ brake (of an automobile)
كبد kabada u i (kabd) to affect severely, afflict gravely, wear out, wear down (ه s.o.; of pain, losses, etc.) II to cause (ه ھ to s.o. s.th., esp. losses), inflict (ه ھ upon s.o. s.th., esp. losses); to culminate, pass through the meridian (star); to reach its climax III to bear, suffer, endure, undergo, sustain, stand (ھ s.th.) V to bear, suffer, endure, undergo, sustain, stand (ھ losses, hardships, etc.); to have to take upon o.s. ( ھ s.th.), be exposed (ھ to); to bear, defray (ھ costs); to take up the center, step into the middle (ھ of a place); to be in the zenith, culminate
كبد kabid, kabd, kibd m. and f., pl. اكباد akbād, كبود kubūd liver; interior, heart; middle, center; -- kabid, kabad center of the sky, zenith
كباد kubād liver ailment
كباد kabbād, kubbād name of several citrus plants (Citrus medica Risso, Citrus Bigaradia Duh., also Zollikoferia spinosa B.; eg.); kabbād (syr.) citron (Citrus medica)
 كبر kabara u (kabr) to exceed in age (ه ب s.o. by), be older (ه than s.o., ب so-and-so much); -- kabura u (kubr, kibar, كبارة kabāra) to be or become great, big, large; to grow, increase, augment, become greater, bigger or larger; to become famous, gain significance, become important; to become too great, too big, toe large (عن for s.th.); to disdain (عن s.th.); to become toe oppressive, too painful, too distressing, too burdensome; to appear intolerable (الى to s.o.); to become too difficult, too hard (الى for s.o.), appear insurmountable (الى to s.o.) II to make great(er), big(ger), large(r), enlarge, magnify, enhance, aggrandize (ھ s.th.); to extend, expand, widen, amplify (
ھ s.th.); to increase, augment (ھ s.th.); to intensify (ھ s.th.); 809 to exaggerate, play up (ھ s.th.); to aggravate, make worse (ھ s.th.); to praise, laud, extol, exalt, glorify, celebrate (ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to exclaim allāhu akbar III to treat haughtily, with disdain, with contempt (ه s.o.); to seek to excel, try to surpass, strive to outdo (ه
s.o.); to contend, vie, strive, contest (ه with s.o.); to oppose, resist, contradict (ه s.o.); to renege, renounce (ھ s.th.), offend (ھ against), act contrary (ھ to); to stickle, insist stubbornly on one’s opinion IV to consider great, deem significant, regard as formidable (ھ s.th.); to praise, laud, extol (ه s.o.); to show respect (ه to s.o.), he deferential (ه toward s.o.); to admire (ھا s.th.) V and VI to be proud or haughty, give o.s. airs, swagger; to be overweening, overbearing (على toward s.o.) X to deem great or important (ھ s.th.); to be proud, haughty, display arrogance (على toward s.o.)
كبر kibr bigness, largeness, magnitude; greatness, eminence, grandeur; significance, importance; standing, prestige; nobility; pride, haughtiness, presumption, arrogance
كبر kubr greatness, eminence, grandeur; bigness, largeness, magnitude; size, bulk, extent, expanse; power, might; glory, fame, renown, standing, prestige; nobility; main part, bulk
كبر kibar bigness, largeness, magnitude; greatness, eminence, grandeur; old age
كبرة kabra old age
كبير kabīr pl. كبار kibār, كبراء kubarā’  great, big, large, sizable; bulky, voluminous, spacious; extensive, comprehensive; significant, considerable, formidable, huge, vast, enormous; powerful, influential, distinguished, eminent; important; old │ البحار امراء كبير
k. umara’ al-b. Admiral of the Fleet (Eg.); الخدم كبيرة k. al-kadam female head of the houaehold staff; األساقفة كبير k. al-asāqifa archbishop; السن كبير k. as-sinn old; كبير القضاة k. al-quḍāh chief justice, chief magistrate; كبير ابو (abū) asafetida, devil’s dung (pharm.); وكبيرة صغيرة كل every
 single detail; الضباط كبار k. aḍ-ḍubbāṭ senior officers; الموظفين كبار k. al- muwaẓẓafīn senior officials; الھيئات كبار k. al-hai’āt the leading personalities of public corporations
كبيرة kabīra pl. -āt, كبائر kabā’ir , كبر kubur great sin, grave offense, Atrocious crime
كبار kubār, kubbār very great, very big, huge
كبرياء kibriyā’ grandeur, glory, magnificence, majesty; pride, haughtiness, presumption, arrogance
اكبر akbar  pl. -ūn, اكابر akābir , f. كبرى kubrā, pl. كبريات kubrayāt greater, bigger, larger; older; senior-ranking │ األكبر المفتي (muftī) grand mufti; الكبرى سوريا (sūriyā) Greater Syria; القوم أكابر a. al-qaum the leaders of the people; واألعيان األكابر the grandees and notables
تكبير takbīr enlargement, increase, augmentation, magnification; enhancement, aggrandizement; intensification, amplification; exaggeration; augmentative (gram.); praise, laudation, extolment, exaltation, glorification; the exclamation اكبر ﷲ allāhu akbar
مكابرة mukābara haughtiness, superciliousness, overweening, overbearingness; self-importance, pomposity; stubbornness, obstinacy, self- will
اكبار ikbār admiration; deference, respect, regard, esteem
تكبر takabbur and تكابر takābur pride, haughtiness, presumption, arrogance
مكبر mukabbir pl. -āt O amplifier (el.)
│ الصوت مكبر m. aṣ-ṣaut or صوت مكبر (ṣautī) 810 loud-speaker (radio); نظارة مكبرة (naẓẓāra) magnifying glass
مكبرة mukabbira pl. -āt magnifying glass
مكبر mukabbar enlarged, magnified │ مكبرة صورة (ṣūra) enlargement, blowup (phot.); مكبرة بصورة increasingly, on a larger scale, to an increasing degree
مكابر mukābir presumptuous, arrogant, supercilious, haughty, overweening; quarrelsome, contentious, cantankerous; self-willed, obstinate, stubborn; stickler
متكبر mutakabbir proud, imperious, high-handed, haughty, supercilious, overweening
 كبر kabar capers; caper shrub
كبرت kabrata to coat with sulfur (ھ s.th.); to sulfurize, sulfurate (ھ s.th.); to vulcanize ( ھ s.th.)
عود كبريت │ matches sulfur; kibrīt كبريت
‘ūd k. matches, a match
كبريتة kibrīta match, matchstick
كبريتي kibrītī sulfureous, sulfurate, sulfurous, sulfuric │ كبريتي حمام (ḥammām) sulfur bath; كبريتي ينبوع (yanbū‘) sulfur spring
كبريتات kibrītāt sulfate
كبري kubrī or كوبري (from Turk. köprü) pl.
كباري kabārī bridge; deck
كبس kabasa i (kabs) to exert pressure (على on), press (على s.th. or on s.th.), squeeze (على s.th.); to attack, raid, take by surprise (ھ a place); to intercalate (بيوم السنة as-sanata bi-yaumin a day in a leap year);
to preserve (in vinegar, or the like), pickle (ھ s.th.); to marinate (ھ s.th.); to conserve (ھ s.th.) II to press or squeeze hard (ھ s.th.); to massage (ه s.o.)
كبس kabs pressure, squeeze, pressing; raid, attack; preservation (esp. in vinegar), pickling; intercalation (of a day; astron.)
كبس kabsa (n. vic.) raid, surprise attack
كباس kabbas piston; press; ramrod │ O
penknife (mūsā) موسى كباس
كبيس kabīs preserved (esp. in vinegar), pickled; pickled food, preserves; intercalary, intercalated, interpolated │ سنة كبيسة (sana) leap year
كابوس kābūs pl. كوابيس kawābīs  night- mare, incubus; terrible vision, phantom, bugbear
كبس mikbas pl. مكابس makābis  or مكباس mikbās pl. مكابيس makābīs  press; piston (of a pump); ramrod │ القطن مكبس m. al-
 quṭn cotton press; O الخطابات مكبس letter press, copying press; O مائي مكبس (mā’ī) hydraulic press
تكبيس takbīs massage
O كابسة آلة āla kābisa compressor
مكبوس makbūs raided, attacked; pressed; preserved, pickled; مكبوسات canned goods, conserves
كبسول kabsūl or كبسولة kabsūla capsule; percussion cap, primer, detonator; snap fastener
كبش kabaša u (kabš) to take a handful (ھ of s.th.); to grasp with the hand, clench (ھ s.th.)
كبش kabš pl. كباش kibāš, اكباش akbāš ram, male sheep; bellwether; chieftain, chief, head, leader; battering-ram; pile driver; rammer; (pl. كبوش kubūš)buttress, pier, stay, prop, support; mulberry │ كبش التصادم k. at-taṣādum (pl. كبوش) bumper (railroad); قرنفل كبوش k. qaranful cloves
كبشة kabša a handful; grasp, grip
كبشة kabša ladle, scoop
كبشة kubša pl. كبش kubaš hook, clamp, cramp, brace; clasp, brooch 811
كبكب kabkaba to topple, upset, capsize, overturn, turn upside down, revert, invert ( ھ s.th.); to spill (ھ s.th.)
كبيكج kabīkaj Asiatic crowfoot (Ranunculus Asiaticus; bot.)
 كبل kabala i (kabl) to put in irons, shackle, fetter (ه s.o.); to keep waiting (ه s.o., ھ for s.th., esp. for the payment of a debt) II to put in irons, shackle, fetter (ه s.o.) III to keep waiting (ه s.o., ھ for s.th., esp. for the payment of a debt), defer, put off (الدين ad- daina the payment of a debt)
كبل kabl, kibl pl. كبول kubūl leg iron, chain, shackle, fetter
كبولي kabūlī and كابولي kābūlī pl. كوابيل kawābīl  bracket, corbel, console (arch.); lean to roof, pent roof, shed roof (arch.)
 كابل and كابلي look up alphabetically
كابين pl. كباين look up alphabetically
(كبا (كبو kabā u (kabw, kubūw) to fall forward (ل وجھه li-wajhihī on one’s face); to stumble,
trip, slip; -- u to empty (ھ a vessel), pour out the contents (ھ of a vessel); to become dim (light); to become dull, fade, lose luster (color); to rise, swirl up (dust) IV to fail, fail to produce a spark (lighter) VII to fail headlong; to stumble, trip, slip
كبوة kabwa (n. vic.) fall, tumble, drop; stumble, trip, slip, false step; dust
كاب kābin dull, dim, pale, dead, flat; slack, weak, decrepit; see كاب alphabetically
كب see كباية كبت  see كبوت
كت katta i (katt) to hum softly
كت katt and كتيت katīt soft humming
كتالوج katālōg pl. -āt catalogue
كتب kataba u (katb, كتبة kitba, كتابة kitāba) to write, pen, write down, put down in writing, note down, inscribe, enter, record, book, register (ھ s.th.); to compose, draw up, indite, draft (ھ s.th.); to bequeath, make over by will (ھ ل s.th. to s.o.); to prescribe (ھ على s.th. to s.o.); to foreordain, destine (ل or ھ على s.th. to s.o.; of God); pass. kutiba to be rated, be foreordained, be destined (ل to s.o.) │ كتب ان نفسه على to be firmly resolved to ..., make it one’s duty to ...; عنه كتب to write from s.o.’s dictation; كتابه كتب (kitābahū) to draw up the marriage contract for s.o., marry s.o. (على to) II to make (ه s.o.) write (ھ s.th.); to form or deploy in squadrons ( ھ troops) III to keep up a correspondence, exchange letters, correspond (ه with s.o.) IV to dictate (ه ھ to s.o. s.th.), make (ه s.o.) write (ھ s.th.) VI to write to each other, exchange letters, keep up a correspondence VII to subscribe VIII to write (ھ s.th.); to copy (ھ s.th.), make a copy (ھ of s.th.); to enter one’s name; to subscribe (ل for); to contribute, subscribe ( ب ل money to); to be entered, be recorded, be registered X to ask (ه s.o.) to write (ھ s.th.); to dictate (ه ھ to s.o. s.th.), make (ه s.o.) write (ھ s.th.); to have a copy made ( ه by s.o.)
كتاب kitāb pl. كتب kutub piece of writing, record, paper; letter, note, message; document, deed; contract (esp.
 marriage contract); book; الكتاب the Koran; the Bible │ الكتب اھل ahl a1-k. the people of the Book, the adherents of a revealed religion, the kitabis, i.e., Christians and Jews; الزواج كتاب k. az-zawāj marriage contract; الطالق كتاب k. aṭ-ṭalāq bill of divorce; تعليمي كتاب (ta‘līmī) textbook; كتاب االعتماد credentials (dipl.); الكتب دار library
كتبي kutubī pl. -ya bookseller, book- dealer 812
kutubkāna كتبخانة and kitābkāna كتابخانة
library; bookstore
كتاب kuttāb pl. كتاتيب katātīb  kuttab, Koran school (lowest elementary school)
كتيب kutayyib booklet
كتابة kitāba (act or practice of) writing; art of writing, penmanship; system of writing, script; inscription; writing, legend; placard, poster; piece of writing, record, paper; secretariat; written amulet, charm; pl. كتابات writings, essays; كتابة kitābatan in writing │ بالكتابة written; بدون كتابة bi-dūn k. unwritten, oral; blank; كتابة التاريخ historiography, historical writing; الدولة كتابة k. ad-daula (Magr.) secretariat of stae; عامة كتابة (‘āmma) secretariat general; الكتابة اسم ism al-k. pen name, nom de plume; الكتابة آلة typewriter; الكتابة لغة lugat al-k. literary language; الكتابة ورق waraq al-k. writing paper
كتابي kitābī written, in writing; clerical; literary; scriptural, relating to the revealed Scriptures (Koran, Bible); kitabi, adherent of a revealed religion; the written part (of an examination) │ كتابي اسلوب (uslūb) literary style; كتابية غلطة (galṭa) slip of the pen, clerical error; كتابية اعمال clerical work, office work, desk work; الكتابي الكمال (kamāl) literary perfection; كتابية لغة (luga) literary language; كتابي موظف (muwaẓẓaf) clerk, clerical worker (of a government office)
كتيبة katība pl. كتائب katā’ib  squadron; cavalry detachment; (Eg. 1939) battalion, (Ir. after 1922) regiment, (later) battalion, (Syr.) battalion of armored, cavalry, or motorized, unite (mil.); (piece of) writing, record, paper, document; written amulet
مكتب maktab pl. مكاتب makātib  office; bureau; business office; study; school,
elementary school; department, agency, office; desk │ األخبار مكتب and األنباء مكتب news agency, press agency, wire service; البريد مكتب post office; الرئيسي البريد مكتب (ra’īsī) main post office; البرق مكتب m. al- barq telegraph office; التحرير مكتب editorial room; التليفونات مكتب telephone central office; السفريات مكتب m. as-safarīyāt (syr.) travel agency; الصحة مكتب m. aṣ-ṣiḥḥa board of health; االستعالمات مكتب information office, information desk; news agency, press agency, wire service
مكتبة maktaba pl. -āt, مكاتب makātib 
library; bookstore; desk
O مكتاب miktāb typewriter
مكاتبة mukātaba exchange of letters, correspondence
اكتتاب iktitāb enrollment, registration, entering (of one’s name); -- (pl. -āt) subscription; contribution (of funds)
استكتاب istiktāb dictation
dictaphone آلة استكتابية istiktābī: استكتابي
كاتب kātib pl. -ūn, كتاب kuttāb, كتبة kataba writer; scribe, scrivener; secretary; clerk typist; office worker, clerical employee; clerk, registrar, actuary, court clerk; notary; writer, author │ الدولة كاتب k. ad-daula (Mag.) (under)secretary of state; السر كاتب k. s-sirr private secretary; كاتب قصصي (qiṣaṣī) writer, novelist; المحكمة كاتب
k. al-mahkama court clerk; كاتبة آلة
typewriter
كاتبة kātiba pl. -āt woman secretary; authoress, writer
مكتوب maktūb written, written down, recorded; fated, foreordained, destined (ل or على to s.o.); s.th. written, writing; -- (pl. مكاتيب makātīb ) a writing, message, note; letter
مكاتب mukātib correspondent; (newspaper) reporter
مكتتب muktatib subscriber 813
كتب see كتبخانة and كتابخانة
اكتع akta’ pl. كتع kut’ having crippled fingers; one-armed
كتف katafa i (katf) to fetter, shackle (ه s.o., esp. by tying his hands); to tie up, bind (ھ
 s.th.) II to tie the hands behind the back; to cross, fold (ھ hands, arms behind the back or in front of the chest) V and X to cross or fold one’s arms VI to stand shoulder to shoulder; to support one another; to be united in solidarity, stand together
كتف katif, katf, kitf pl. اكتاف aktāf, كتفة kitafa shoulder; shoulder blade, scapula; mountain slope; O end support of a bridge; (pl. اكتاف aktāf) buttress, pier │ ما الكتف تؤكل ھكذا (tu’kalu) that’s certainly not the way to do it! that’s no way to handle it!
كتاف kitāf pl. كتف kutuf shackle, manacle, handcuff
كتف aktaf , f. كتفاء katfā’ , pl. كتف kutf
broad-shouldered
 كتكت katkat floss, silk waste
 كتكوت katkūt pl. كتاكيت katākīt  chicken, chick
كتل katala u (katl) and II to agglomerate, conglomerate, gather into a compact mass, press into a lump (ھ s.th.) V to be heaped up, piled up, agglomerated, clustered, clotted, massed, pressed into a compact mass or lump; to agglomerate, cluster, clot, pile up, gather in a mass; to unite in a bloc or group
كتلة kutla pl. كتل kutal lump, chunk, clod, clot; bulk, mass; cube; block; bloc; beam, joist, transom, lintel, girder │ كتل بشرية (bašarīya) crowds, throngs, masses; الجسد كتلة kutlat al-jasad bulk of the body, frame; األعصاب من كتلة (a‘ṣāb) a fearless, husky fellow; الوطنية الكتلة (waṭanīya) the National Bloc
مكتل miktal pi. مكاتل makatil  large basket
تكتل takattul formation of blocs (pol.) │ التكتل سياسة policy of blocs (pol.)
متكتل mutakattil clotted, lumpy, agglomerate, clustered, massed; concentrated, compact; burly, husky, stocky, heavily built (body)
كتم katama u (katm, كتمان kitmān) to hide (ھ s.th., عن from s.o.); to conceal, secrete, keep secret (ھ s.th., عن from s.o.); to suppress, repress, restrain, check, curb, subdue (ھ anger, passion); to hold (ھ
one’s breath); to lower, muffle (ھ the voice); to stifle, smother, quench (ھ fire)
│ انفاسه كتم to take s.o.’s breath away, drive
s.o. out of his senses II to hide, conceal (ھ s.th.) III to hide, conceal, keep, withhold ( ه ھ from s.o. s.th.) V to keep silent, hold one’s tongue, keep mum VIII = II X to ask (ه s.o.) to keep (ه a secret); to confide (ه ھ to s.o. s.th.)
كتم katm and كتمان kitmān secrecy, concealment, secretion, silence; restraint, control, suppression (esp. of an emotion)
كتيم katīm shut tight, hermetically sealed, impenetrable, impermeable, impervious
كتوم katūm reticent, reserved, secretive, uncommunicative, taciturn, discreet
كتام kitām (eg.) constipation
تكتم takattum secrecy, secretiveness, reticence, reserve, taciturnity, discretion
اكتتام iktitām concealment, secretion, secrecy, silence
كاتم kātim: السر كاتم k. as-sirr (private) secretary
مكتوم maktūm hidden, concealed, kept, preserved (secret); (eg.) constipated 814
 كتن katina a (katan) to be dirty, soiled, smutty, blackened by soot II to smut, soil ( ھ s.th.)
كتن katan dirt, smut, soot
  كتان kattān (kittān) flax; linen
كتاني kattānī made of linen, linen (adj.)
  كتينة (It. catena) katīna (watch) chain
كثوثة katāta, كثاثة katat, كثث( a i katta كث
kutūta) to be thick or dense (esp. hair)
كثث katat thickness, density
كث katt and كثيث katīt thick, dense, thick-grown, densely crowded
كثب katab nearness, proximity, vicinity │ على من كثب and من كثب عن in the vicinity (or neighborhood) of, near; كثب (عن) من from nearby, at a short distance
kutub, كثب aktiba, اكثبة pl. katīb كثيب
كثبان kutbān sandhill, dune
 كثر katara u (katr) to outnumber, exceed in number (ه ,ھ s.o., s.th.) – katura u (كثرة katra) to be much, many or numerous; to be more (عن than); to happen frequently, occur often; to increase, augment, multiply, grow II to increase, augment, compound, multiply (ھ s.th.) III to outnumber, exceed in number (ه ,ھ s.o., s.th.); to vie in quantity or number (ه ,ھ with) IV to do much (من in or of s.th.); to give much or frequently (ل من to s.o. of s.th.); to do constantly,
always or frequently (من or في s.th.); to increase, augment (ھ s.th.) VI to band together, form a gang, rally (على against) X = IV; to regard as too much, deem excessive, find exorbitant (ھ s.th.); to regard as too high, as too troublesome (ھ s.th.); to think not worth the trouble (ھ s.th., على with regard to s.o.); to begrudge (على ھ s.o. s.th.); to demand much, ask for a lot │ بخيره استكثر (bi-kairihī) to thank s.o.
كثر kutr large quantity, abundance, plenty; major portion, greater part
كثرة katra large quantity, great number, multitude, abundance, copiousness, numerousness, frequency, multiplicity, plurality; majority, major portion (من of)
│ بكثرة plentifully, abundantly, a lot; جمع الكثرة jam‘ al-k. plural of multitude (gram.)
كثير katīr pl. كثار kitār much, many, numerous, abundant, plentiful, copious; frequent; a large portion, a great deal, a great many, a lot; الكثير the most part, most (من of); كثيرا katīran very, much, to a large extent; often, frequently │ ما كثيرا katīran mā often, frequently; بكثير (after a comparative) far, by far; الكثيرون من، الكثير من the majority of, most of; plenty of, a great many, a lot of; على كثير too much for; الكثير الشيء most of it; كثير ھذا that’s pretty strong! that’s laying it on thick! من كثير في األوقات and كثيرة احيان في frequently, often
كثيراء katīrā’  tragacanth (Astragalus gummifer Lab.; bot.); gum obtained from tragacanth
اكثر aktar  more; oftener, more frequently; more numerous; longer; most; major portion, greater part, majority; األكثرون the majority, most of them │ اكثر فاكثر more and more; األكثر على at most;
latest; األمر اكثر aktara l-amr at best; من اكثر ذلك besides, moreover
اكثرية aktarīya majority
مكثار miktār very talkative, garrulous
تكثير taktīr increase, augmentation, multiplication. propagation, ample provision, abundant supply
اكثار iktār increase, augmentation, multiplication, propagation, ample provision, abundant supply; raising, increase (esp. of the yield) 815
تكاثر takātur growth, increase; multiplication, propagation, proliferation
مكثر muktir rich, well-to-do
متكاثر mutakātir numerous, extensive; manifold, multifarious, multiple │ متكاثر الرقاع m. ar-riqā‘ patched in numerous places
كثف katufa u (كثافة katāfa) to be thick or dense; to thicken, be condensed, become thicker or denser II to make thick or dense, thicken, compress, solidify, concentrate (ھ s.th.); to inspissate, condense (ھ s.th.); O (el.) to increase the capacity V and VI to grow denser, become concentrated; to thicken, become viscous; to be condensed
كثيف katīf pl. كثاف kitāf thick; dense; compact; heavy, coarse, crude; viscous, sirupy (e.g., sauce)
كثافة katāfa thickness; density; heaviness; solidity, firmness; compactness, fullness, intensity; consistency, degree of density or viscosity; O capacity (el.) │ السكان كثافة k. as-sukkān density of population; O كثافة الصوت k. aṣ-ṣaut sonority, sound intensity
تكثيف taktīf compression, concentration, solidification; condensation
تكاثف takātuf concentration, consolidation; condensation
مكثف mukattif pl. -āt capacitor, condenser │ متغير مكثف (mutagayyir) variable capacitor (radio)
مكثف mukattaf condensed
متكاثف mutahātif massing, concentrating, gathering, piling up; dense
 كثلك II takatlaka to become (a) Catholic
katlaka كثلكة pl. katūlīkī كثوليكي
Catholic; a Catholic
الكثلكة al-katlaka Catholicism
كثيراء katīrā’  tragacanth (Astragalus gummifer Lab.; bot.); gum obtained from tragacanth
كح kaḥḥa u to cough
كحة kuḥḥa cough
كحت kaḥata a and II (eg.) to scrape off, scratch off (ھ s.th.)
كحكح kaḥkaḥa to cough, cough slightly, hack
كحكحة kaḥkaḥa short, dry cough
كحل kaḥala u a (kaḥl) and II to rub, paint or smear (with kohl) (ھ the eyes) V and VIII to color (the edges of) the eyelids with kohl │ غمضا) غماضا اكتحل ما) (gamīḍan, gimāḍan, gumḍan) to find no sleep
كحل kuḥl pl. اكحال akḥāl antimony; kohl, a preparation of pulverized antimony used for darkening (the edges of) the eyelids; any preparation for coloring the eyelids
كحل kaḥal black coloring (of the edges) of the eyelids
كحل kaḥil darkened with kohl, dyed black (eyelids)
كحلي kuḥlī dark blue, navy blue
كحلة kuḥla (eg.) pointing, filling or grouting of the joints (of a wall; masonry)
اكحل akḥal , f. كحالء kaḥlā’ , pl. كحل kuḥl black (eye); األكحل the medial arm vein
كحالء kaḥlā’ (eg.) a variety of blueweed (Echium cericeum V.; bot.)
كحيل kaḥīl pl. كحائل kaḥā’il  black, dyed black, darkened with kohl (eyelid); horse of noblest breed
كحول kuḥūl alcohol, spirit
كحولي kuḥūlī alcoholic, spirituous
كحيلي kuḥailī and كحيالن kuḥailān horse of noblest bread 816
كحال kiḥāl antimony powder, eye powder
كحال kaḥḥāl eye doctor, oculist (old designation)
مكحل mikḥal and مكحال mikḥāl kohl stick, pencil for darkening the eyelids
مكحلة mikḥala pl. مكاحل makāḥil  kohl container, kohl jar; solar quadrant; (syr.) rifle, gun
تكحيل takḥīl treatment of the eyes with kohl
كاحل kāḥil pl. كواحل kawāḥil  anklebone
kawākin كواخ pl. kākiya كاخية and kikya كخية
butler, steward
كد kadda u (kadd) to work hard, exert o.s., toil, labor, slave; to fatigue, wear out, overwork, exhaust, weary, tire (ه s.o.) II to chase away, drive away (ه s.o.) VIII and X to urge, drive, rush (ه s.o.); to wear out, overwork, exhaust, weary, tire (ه s.o.)
كد kadd trouble, pains, labor, toil, hard work
كدود kadūd industrious, hard-working, diligent
مكدود makdūd worn out, exhausted, overworked
كدح kadaḥa a (kadḥ) to exert o.s., work hard, toil, labor, slave (في in or with s.th.) VIII to earn a living (لعياله li-‘iyālihī for one’s family)
كدح kadḥ exertion, toil, labor, drudgery
 كدر kadura u and kadira a (kadar, كدارة kadāra, كدور kudūra, كدور kudūr, كدرة kudra) to be turbid, roily, muddy, roiled (liquid); -- kadira a (kadar, كدرة kudra) to be muddy, cloudy, blackish, dingy, flat, swarthy, grimy (color); (kadar, كدورة kudūra) to be dreary, unhappy (life); to be angry (على with s.o.) II to render turbid, to roil, muddy (ھ s.th.), trouble, disturb, spoil, ruffle (ھ s.th., على for s.o., e.g., s.o.’s peace of mind); to grieve, worry, trouble, vex, irritate, annoy, molest, disturb, distress (ھ s.o.) V to be turbid, roily, muddy, roiled, troubled; to be angry, be sore (من at s.th.), feel offended, be annoyed, be displeased (من by s.th.), be peeved (من at, about) VII to become turbid, muddy, dull, flat; to swoop down (bird)
كدر kadar turbidity, muddiness, cloudiness, opaqueness, roiledness; worry,
 sorrow, grief, distress, vexation, irritation, annoyance
كدرة kudra turbidity, muddiness, cloudiness, roiledness, impurity; dingy color, dinginess
كدرة kadara clod of dirt, filth
كدر kadir and كدير kadīr turbid, muddy, roily, roiled; dull, flat, dingy, grimy (color); worried, troubled, disturbed
kudr كدر pl. kadrā’ , كدراء f. akdar , اكدر
dingy, swarthy, dark-colored
تكدير takdīr roiling, troubling, ruffling; offending, offense, affront, indignity
متكدر mutakaddir angry, sore, peeved (
من at), annoyed. Irritated, offended (من by)
  كادر look up alphabetically
كدس kadasa i (kads) and II to pile up, heap up, accumulate, amass (ھ s.th.); to cram together, press together, compress (ھ s.th.) V to be heaped up, be piled up; to pile up, accumulate (intr.); to press together, get crammed up
كدس kuds pl. اكداس akdās heap, pile; stack (of grain, hay, etc.)
كداس kuddās pl. كداديس kadādīs  heap, pile; stack (of grain, hay, etc.)
كداسة kudāsa heap, pile, stack
تكديس takdīs accumulation; stacking 817
كدش kadaša i (kadš) to gain, earn
كديش kadīš pl. كدش kudš cart horse, nag, jade
كدم kadama a i (kadm) to bite (with the front teeth); to bruise, contuse
كدم kadma pl. kadamāt bite; wound caused by a bite; bruise, contusion
كدى kadā i (kady) to give little, skimp, stint II to beg IV = I
كدية kudya begging, mendicity
كذا ka-dā see ك ka
كذب kadaba i (kidb, kadib, كذبة kadba, kidba) to lie; to deceive, delude, mislead; to tell (ه or على s.o.) a lie, to lie (ه or على to s.o.) II to accuse of lying, call a liar (ه s.o.), disbelieve s.o., give the lie to s.o. (ه); to disprove, refute, disown, deny (ب or ھ
s.th.) │ فعل ان كذب ما he did not hesitate to do so IV to cause (ه s.o.) to lie; to call a liar, prove a liar (ه s.o.), give the lie (ه to s.o.)
كذب kidb, kadib and كذبة kadba, kidba lie; deceit, falsehood, untruth │ ابريل كذبة April fool’s joke
كذوب kadūb liar
كذاب kaddāb liar, swindler; lying, untruthful; false, deceitful
lie akādīb  اكاذيب pl. ukdūba اكذوبة
اكذب akdab  a greater liar, more mendacious, more untruthful, falser │ مسيلمة من اكذب (musailimata) a greater liar than Musailima (proverbially of a liar)
تكذيب takdīb denial
كاذب kādib liar; lying, untruthful; false, deceptive, fallacious, delusive, specious, sham, make-believe │ كاذب امل (amal) fallacious hope; كاذب بالغ (balāg) slander, defamation (jur.)
مكذوب makdūb false, untrue, fabricated, trumped up
ka ك see كذلك
كرو  see كرة 
 كر karra u (karr, كرور kurūr, تكرار takrār) to turn around and attack (على s.o., s.th.); to return, come back, recur; to withdraw, retreat, fall back; to attack (على s.o.), bear down (على upon); -- a (كرير karīr) to rattle in the throat II to repeat, reiterate, do again, do repeatedly (ھ s.th.); to pose over and over again (ھ a question, على to s.o.), ask (على s.o.) repeatedly (ھ a question); to clarify, filter (ھ s.th.); to rectify, purify (ھ s.th.); to refine (ھ sugar, etc.) V to be repeated, be reiterated, recur; to be rectified, be purified, be refined
كر karr attack, charge │ والفر الكر (farr) attack and retreat (in battle); وفر كر بين alternately, intermittently, by fits and starts, by jerks; الدھور كر على and كر على الزمن (k. az-zamn) in the course of time
كرة karra attack; return, comeback, recurrence; -- (pl. -āt) one time (= مرة); a hundred thousand; karratan once; sometimes, at times; at a time │ اخرى كرة
 karratan ukrā a second time, once more;
كرة بعد كرة repeatedly, time and again
كرار look up alphabetically
كرور kurūr return, comeback, recurrence; succession, sequence, order
كرير karīr rattle in the throat
كرارية kurrārīya pl. -āt (eg.) spool, bobbin, reel
مكر makarr pl. -āt reel
تكرير takrīr repetition, reiteration; classification, rectification, purification, refinement; refining │ السكر تكرير معمل ma‘mal t. as-sukkar sugar refinery
تكرار takrār repetition, reiteration; تكرارا takrāran repeatedly, frequently, quite often │ وتكرارا مرارا (mirāran) repeatedly, time and again 818
مكرر mukarrar repeated, reiterated; following twice (number), bis (after a number); a multiple; rectified, purified, refined │ مكرر سكر (sukkar) refined sugar; مكرر ٧٣ ص page 37b
متكرر mutakarrir recurring, recurrent, reiterated, reiterative; repeated, frequent
كراج garāž pl. -āt garage (syr.)
كرار karār pl. -āt pantry, storeroom; cellar
كرافتة karāfatta neoktie, cravat
كراكوفيا karākōfiyā Cracow (city in S Poland) كراميل (Fr. caramel) karamēl caramel candy  كرب karaba u (karb) to oppress, distress,
grieve, worry, trouble, fill with concern (ه s.o.); to overburden (ھ a beast of burden) IV to hurry, hasten, rush VII and VIII to be worried, grieved, troubled, distressed, anxious, apprehensive, feel concern, be afraid
كرب karb pl. كروب kurūb worry, sorrow, care, grief; apprehension, concern, anxiety, fear; distress, trouble; pain, torment, torture, agony
كربة kurba pl. كرب kurab worry, sorrow, care, grief; apprehension. concern, anxiety, fear; distress, trouble; pain, torment, torture, agony
مكروب makrūb sad, worried, grieved, sorrowful, distressed; apprehensive, anxious, alarmed, fearful, troubled, scared, confused; see alphabetically
مكترب muktarib sad, worried, grieved, sorrowful, distressed; apprehensive, anxious, alarmed, fearful, troubled, soared, confused
 كرب kreb crepe │ ديشين كرب k. dīšīn and كرب شين k. šīn crepe de Chine
كاروبيم -ūn, pl. karūbī كروبي and karūb كروب 
kārūbīm cherub, archangel
كرباج kurbāj, kirbāj pl. كرابيج karābīj  whip, lash, riding whip, kurbash
كرباس kirbās pl. كرابيس karābīs  a white cotton fabric
كربال kirbāl pl. كرابيل karābīl  teasing bow (for combing or carding cotton); coarse sieve
كربالء karbalā’  Karbala (holy city of the Shiites in central Iraq)
ورق كربون │ coal karbōn carbon) (Fr. كربون
waraq k. carbon paper
كراث = (eg.) kurāt كرات 
 اكرت akrat  curly, kinky (hair)
 كرتن kartana to put under quarantine, to quarantine (على s.o.) II takartana to be put under quarantine, be quarantined
 كرتون kartūn pl. كراتين karātin  cardboard, pasteboard; carton
كرث karata u i (kart) to oppress, depress, distress, worry, trouble (ه s.o.); to concern, affect, move (ه s.o.) IV do. VIII to care (ل for), heed, bear in mind (ل s.th.), pay attention (ل to), take an interest (ل in)
كريث karīt oppressed, depressed, distressed, anguished, worried, troubled, vexed, annoyed
كراث karrāt, kurrāt leek (Allium parrum L.; bot.)
اكتراث iktirāt attention, notice, concern, interest │ االكتراث قلة qillat al-ikt. indifference
كارث kārit oppressive, grievous, painful
 كارثة kārita pl. كوارث kawārit  disaster, catastrophe │ األمطار كارثة k. al-amṯār natural catastrophe, torrential rains
الكرج al-kurj the Georgians
كرجي kurjī Georgian (adj and n.) 819
كرح kirḥ pl. اكراح akrāḥ monk’s cell
karākīn كراخين -āt, pl. karkāna كرخانة
workshop, factory; (eg.) brothel
كرخانجي karkānjī artisan, craftsman
Kurdistan بالد الكرد │ Kurds the al-kurd الكرد
كردي kurdī Kurdish; (pl. اكراد akrād) Kurd │ األكراد جبل jabal al-a. the Kurdish mountains, Kurdistan
كردان kirdān pl. كرادين karādīn  necklace
كردس kardasa to heap up, pile up (ھ s.th.); to crowd together, cram together (ھ, s.o., s.th.) II takardasa to be heaped up, be piled up; to flock together, crowd together
كردون (Fr. cordon) kordōn pl. -āt cordon; ribbon, braid, lace, trimming │ صحي كردون (ṣiḥḥī) sanitary cordon
 كرز karaza i (كروز kurūz) to hide, seek refuge (الى with)
 كرز karaza (karz) to preach, spread (باإلنجيل
bi-l-injīl the Gospel)
كرز karz and كرازة karāza sermon, preaching of the Gospel │ المرقسية الكرازة (marqusīya) the missionary province of St. Mark, the jurisdiction of the Coptic Patriarchate
takārīz تكاريز pl. takrīz تكريز
consecration, benediction (Chr.)
كارز kāriz preacher
 كرز karaz (coll.; n. un. ة) cherry
كرزى karazī cherry-red
 كرس II to lay the foundation (ھ of a building)
V to stick together, cohere
كرسي kursī pl. كراسي karāsīy, كراس karāsin chair; throne, see; seat; professorial chair; base, pedestal, socle; bearing (techn.) │ بيل كرسي k. bīl and كرسي بلى (billī) hall bearing; دائر كرسي revolving stool, swivel chair; الرسولي الكرسي (rasūlī) the Apostolic See; طويل كرسي chaise longue; deck chair; الملك كرسي k. l-malik
royal throne; المملكة كرسي k. l-mamlaka capital, metropolis; ھزاز كرسي (hazzāz) rocking chair; كرسي استاذ ustād k. full professor
كراسة kurrāsa pl. -āt, karārīs  quire; booklet; notebook, copy book; sketchbook; brochure; installment, fascicle (of a book)
  كرس II to consecrate, dedicate, inaugurate, open ceremonially (ھ s.th.; Chr.); to hallow, sanctify (ھ e.g., principles); to dedicate, devote (ھ ل s.th. to s.o.)
تكريس takrīs consecration, dedication, ceremonial inauguration (Chr.); devoting, dedication
مكرس mukarras consecrated; dedicated
│ مكرس ماء holy water (Chr.)
كرسوع kursū‘ pl. كراسيع karāsī‘  carpal end of the ulna, carpal bone, wristbone
كرسف karsafa to hamstring, hook (ھ an animal)
كرسنة kirsinna, kirsanna variety of vetch (bot.)
كرش kariša a (karaš) to be wrinkled, shriveled, crumpled, crinkled, puckered; to shrivel, form wrinkles, be drawn into wrinkle II to wrinkls one’s face, knit one’s brows, frown V = I
كرش kirš, kariš f., pl. اكراش akrāš, كروش kurūš stomach (primarily of ruminants = craw); paunch; belly
كرشة kirša (eg.) tripe, intestines
كريشة (eg.) krēša a thin, crinkled fabric; crepe
mukriš مكرش and akraš  اكرش
potbellied, paunchy
كرشوني karšūnī Karshuni, Arabic written in Syriac characters 820
كرارط, كرارطي alphabetically; up look كريطة ibid.
كرع kara’a and kari’a a (kar’, كروع kurū’) to sip V to wash one’s feet, perform the partial ablution of the legs (in preparation for prayer); to belch, burp, eruct
كرعة kar’a (n. vic.) sipping, sip, swallow
 كراع kurā’ m. and f., pl. اكرع akru’, اكارع akāri’  foot, trotter (esp. of sheep or oxen); leg; extremity │ األرض اكارع a. al- arḍ the remotest areas of the earth
تكريعة takrī’a belching, eructation
كارع kāri’ pl. كوارع kawāri’ foot, trotter; ankle, anklebone; pl. (eg.) dish prepared of sheep’s trotters
كرفس karafs celery (Apium graveolens L.;
bot.)
 كرك kurk (syr.) fur
 كركة karaka distilling apparatus, distilling flask, retort
 كركي kurkī pl. كراكي karākīy crane (zool.); (
الكراكي (سمك (samak) al-k. pike (zool.)
 كراكة karrāka pl. -āt dredging machine, dredge; penitentiary
 كريك look up alphabetically
كركب karkaba (eg.) to throw into disorder, upset, confuse, disturb (III s.th.); to make a noise
كركبة karkaba disorder, confusion, muddle, jumble
كركدن karkaddan, karkadann rhinoceros │ بحري كركدن (baḥrī) narwhal (zool.)
كركر karkara to repeat, reiterate, do repeatedly (ھ s.th.); to rumble (stomach); to tickle │ الضحك في كركر (ḍaḥk) to burst into loud laughter, roar with laughter
كركرة karkara loud laughter; rumbling (of the stomach)
كركم kurkum (bot.) turmeric (Curcuma longa L.; plant and rootstock); curoumin
كركند karkand spinel ruby (gem); (eg.) lobster (zool.)
كركوز karakūz shadow play
كركون karakōn (eg.) police station
 كرم karuma u (karam, كرمة karama, كرامة karāma) to be noble, high-minded, noble- hearted, magnanimous, generous, liberal, munificent; to be precious II to call noble and high-minded (ه s.o.); to honor, revere, venerate, treat with deference (ه s.o.); to exalt (ه على s.o. above another), bestow honor (ه على upon s.o. before others) │ كرم
وجھه ﷲ (wajhahū) may God honor him I III to vie in generosity (ه s.o.); to meet reverentially, with deference, politely (ه s.o.) IV to call noble and high-minded (ه s.o.); to honor (ه s.o.): to treat reverentially, with deference, politely, hospitably (ه s.o.), bestow honors (ه upon s.o.); to prove o.s. to he high-minded and generous; to honor, present (ه ب s.o. with), confer (ه ب upon s.o. s.th.) V to feign generosity; to show one’s generous side; to be noble; to be friendly, kind, kindly; to be so kind, have the kindness (ب to do s.th., على with regard to or in behalf of s.o.); to present (ب على s.o. with), graciously bestow (على ب upon s.o. s.th.)
كرم karm (coll.) pl. كروم kurūm vine, grapes, grapevines; vineyard; garden, orchard │ الكرم بنت bint al-k. wine
كرمة karma grapevine, vine
كرم karam noble nature; high- mindedness, noble-mindedness, noble- heartedness, generosity, magnanimity; kindness, friendliness, amicability; liberality, munificence; كرما karaman moat kindly, obligingly, out of kindness │ األخالق كرم noble-mindedness, noble character; الحتد كرم k. al-maḥtid noble descent 821
لك كرمة kurmatan laka and لك كرمانا kurmānan laka for your sake, as a favor to you, in your honor
كرامة karāma nobility; high- mindedness, noble-heartedness; generosity, magnanimity; liberality, munificence; honor, dignity; respect, esteem, standing, prestige; mark of honor, token of esteem, favor; (pl. -āt) miracle (worked by a saint) │ لك وكرامة حبا (ḥubban wa-karāmatan) for your sake and in your honor; most gladly, with the greatest pleasure; كرامات صاحب worker of miracles
كريم karīm pl. كرماء kuramā’ , kirām noble; distinguished, high-ranking, eminent; high-minded, noble-minded, noble-hearted; generous, liberal, munificent, hospitable, beneficent; benefactor; kind, kindly, friendly, amicable, obliging, gracious; respectable, honorable, decent; precious, valuable,
 costly; thoroughbred; see also alphabetically; الكريمان the two noble things, namely Holy War and the pilgrimage to Mecca │ األخالق كريم high- minded, noble-minded, noble-hearted, noble; األصل كريم k. al-aṣl of noble descent, highborn, highbred; كريم حجر (ḥajar) precious stone, gem; كريم حصان thoroughbred horse; كريم دخل (dakl) a decent income; الكريم القارئ the gentle reader; الكريمة المعادن the precious metals; الكرام مرمر see  مر marra
كريمة karīma pl. كرائم karā’im  precious thing, object of value, valuable; vital part (of the body; esp. eye); daughter; see also alphabetically; الكريمتان the two eyes │ األموال) المال كرائم) the most prized possession(s)
كرام karrām pl. -ūn winegrower, vinedresser
اكرم akram  pl. اكارم akārim  nobler more distinguished; more precious, more valuable; moat honorable; very high- minded, very noble-hearted, most generous
مكرم makram and مكرم makrama pl. مكارم makārim  noble trait, excellent quality │ األخالق مكارم noble characteristics, noble traits of character
makārim  مكارم pl. makruma مكرمة
noble deed
تكريم takrīm and تكرمة takrima honoring, tribute, honor (bestowed on s.o.) │ له تكريما (takrīman) in his honor
اكرام ikrām honor, respect, deference, tribute; hospitable reception, hospitality; kindness; honorarium │ له اكراما (ikrāman) in his honor
اكرامية ikrāmīya pl. -āt honorarium; bonus
مكرم mukarram honored, revered, venerated; venerable; المكرمية epithet of Mecca
 كريم and كريمة look up alphabetically
كرمش karmaša (eg.) to pucker, be drawn into folds; to crinkle, become wrinkled, shrivel II takarmaša do.
كرمش karmaša fold, crease, wrinkle, crinkle, pucker; knitting
  الكرمل :كرمل al-karmal Mount Carmel (promontory in N Palestine)
كرملي karmalī Carmelite  كرمال karamillā caramel (candy) كراميل look up alphabetically الكرملين al-kremlīn the Kremlin كرنب kurunb (coll.) cabbage
كرنبة kurunba (n. un.) head of cabbage
كرنتينة kurantīna pl. -āt quarantine
كرنيش look up alphabetically 822
كرناف kurnāf pl. كرانيف karānīf  palm stump
كرنافة kunāfa pl. -āt gunstock, rifle butt  كرنك (Engl.) krank pl. -āt crank, crank shaft  كرنك karnak a brand of Egyptian cotton
(named after الكرنن, a village near Luxor)
كرنيش and كورنيش (Fr. corniche) kornīš pl. كرانيش karānīš  cornice, ledge, molding, shelf; coast road, road skirting the shoreline
كره kariha a (karh, kurh, كراھة karāha, كراھية karāhiya) to feel disgust (ھ at), be disgusted (ھ by); to detest, loathe, abhor, hate (ھ s.th.); to dislike (ھ s.th.); karuha u (كراھة karāha) to be repugnant, offensive, hateful, odious, detestable II to make s.o. ( على or ه) hate s.th. (ھ), arouse aversion (ھ الى or ه ھ in s.o. to s.th.) IV to force, compel, coerce (ه على s.o. to) V to have an aversion (ھ to), feel disgust (ھ for), loathe, detest (ھ s.th.) X to have an aversion (ھ to), feel disgust (ھ for), loathe, detest (ھ s.th.); to force, compel, coerce (ه على s.o. to)
كره karh, kurh hatred, hate; aversion, antipathy, dislike, distaste; detestation, abhorrence, disgust, repugnance, loathing; كرھا karhan, kurhan and كره على ‘ala kurhin, منه كره على unwillingly, reluctantly, grudgingly, forcedly; under compulsion, under duress
كره karih loathsome, repugnant, offensive
 كريه karīh unpleasant, disagreeable, offensive, bad, repugnant, repulsive, loathsome, hateful, detestable, abominable, ugly
كراھة karāha hatred, hate; aversion, antipathy, dislike, distaste; abhorrence, detestation, disgust, repugnance, loathing
كراھية karāhiya aversion, antipathy, dislike, distaste, disgust, repugnance, loathing; incompatibility (as a reason of divorce); baseness, abominableness, reprehensibility (Isl. Law) │ كراھية على unwillingly, grudgingly, forcedly
كريھة karīha pl. كرائه karā’ih  adversity; misfortune, calamity
مكره makrah loathsome thing, unpleasant situation
مكرھة makraha, makruha hatred, hate, detestation, abhorrence
مكاره makārih  loathsome things; adversities, calamities
اكراه ikrāh compulsion, coercion, constraint, force; use of force │ باإلكراه by force
اكراھي ikrāhī compulsory, coercive, forced, enforced
تكره takarruh aversion, antipathy, dislike, distaste, disgust, repugnance, loathing
كاره kārih reluctant, grudging, unwilling, averse
مكروه makrūh detested, abhorred, hated, hateful, odious, loathsome, disgusting, distasteful, disagreeable, unpleasant; reprehensible (Isl. Law); مكروه and مكروھة makrūha inconvenience, discomfort, nuisance, adversity; accident, mishap, misadventure
مكره mukrah forced, compelled
متكره mutakarrih unwilling, reluctant
 كرو) and كرا (كري karā u (karw) and كرى karā i (kary) to dig (ھ s.th.)
كرو karw digging, excavation
 كرة kura pl. -āt, كرى kuran globe, sphere; ball
(arḍīya) كرة ارضية and al-a. k. كرة األرض │ at-talji k. كرة الثلج globe; globe, terrestrial
snowball; السلة كرة k. as-salla basketball;
كرة القدم tennis; table al-ṭāwula k. كرة الطاولة
k. al-qadam football, soccer; 823 كرة الكواكب celestial sphere; لحم كرات k. laḥm small meatballs; الماء كرة water polo; اليد كرة
k. al-yad (European) handball; الكرة نصف
niṣf al-k. hemisphere
كرية kurayya globule; pellet │ الكريات الحمر) الحمراء) (ḥamrā’, ḥumr) the red corpuscles, erythrocytes
كري kuriy and كروي kurawī globular, globate, globose, ball-shaped, ball-like, spherical
كروية kurawīya globosity, sphericity, roundness │ األرض كروية k. al-arḍ the sphericity of the earth
كرواتيا kuruwātiyā Croatia
كروان karawān and كيروان a variety of plover (Charadrius cedicnemus L.; zool.)
كروبيم -ūn, pl. karūbī كروبي and karūb كروب
karūbīm cherub, archangel
كروسة (It. carozza) karōsa pl. -āt state carriage, coach
كروكي (Fr. croquis) krōkī pl. كروكيات krōkīyāt
sketch, draft, croquis
كروم krōm chrome, chromium
كرويا karawyā caraway (Carum carvi L.; bot.)
 كري kariya a (karan) to sleep, be asleep, slumber; -- karā i (kary) to dig (ھ e.g., a canal) III and IV to rent, lease, let, let out, farm out, hire out (ه ھ to s.o. s.th.) V to sleep, be asleep, slumber VIII and X to rent, hire (ھ s.th.); to lease, take on lease ( ھ s.th.), take a lease (ھ of s.th.); to hire, employ, engage (ه s.o.), engage the labor or services (ه of s.o.)
كرى karan sleep, slumber
كراء kirā’ rent, hire, hiring; lease; rental, hire; wages, pay
اكراء ikrā’ renting, rent; leasing, letting on lease, farming out
اكتراء iktirā’ renting, rent; leasing, taking on lease; hiring
مكار mukārin pl. -ūn hirer (esp. one of horses, donkeys, mules, etc.); donkey driver, muleteer
 مكر mukrin hirer, lessor; landlord
مكرى mukran rented, let, hired out, let on lease
مكتر muktarin and مستكر mustakrin renter, tenant, lessee │ ثان مكتر (tānin) subtenant, sublessee
كرو   see كرى، كرية  
  كرىkarrī curry
كريت kirīt, كريد kirīd Crete
كريطة (Span. carreta) karrīṭa pl. كراريط karārīṭ 
(tun.) cart, wagon, dray
كرارطي karariṭī carrier, carter, drayman
كريك (Turk. körek) kurīk pl. -āt shovel
كري (Fr. crème) krēm cream │ كريم الحالقة k. al-ḥilāqa shaving cream
كريمة (It. crema; eg.) kréma cream; a kind of thick sauce (served as a condiment)
كز kazza (1  pers. perf. kazuztu) u (كزازة kazāza, كزوزة kuzūza) to become dry and tough, dry up, shrivel; to be withered, shriveled, shrunk; to contract, shrink; (eg.) to have an aversion (من to), feel disgust ( من at), have a distaste (من for); -- (kazz) to contract, shrink, narrow (ھ s.th.); pass. kuzza to have tetanus │ اسنانه على كز (eg.) to gnash one’s teeth
كز kazz pl. كز kuzz dry, dried up, withered, desiccated; shriveled, shrunk; tough, inflexible, unyielding, rigid, stiff │ اليدين كزk. al-yadain closefisted, miserly, niggardly 824
كزز kazaz miserliness, niggardliness
كزاز kuzāz, kuzzāz tetanus
كزازة kazāza dryness; boringness, dullness, tediousness; stinginess, niggardliness; stiffness, rigidity
كزبرة kuzbara, kuzbura coriander (Coriandrum sativum L.; bot.) │ الثعلب كزبرة k. at-ta‘lab pimpernel; خضراء كزبرة (kaḍrā’) chervil; الصخر كزبرة k. aṣ-ṣakr hair-cap moss (Polytrichum communis L.; bot.)
كزورنة (eg.) kazarāna (from It. casseruola) casserole, cooking vessel
كسب kasaba i (kasb) to gain, win, acquire (ھ s.th.); to earn (ھ s.th.); to profit, win, gain;
to gather, acquire (ھ knowledge); to obtain, get, attain (ھ s.th.) │ ل ھتافا كسب (hutafan) win acclaim for, he applauded for; يداه كسبت ما (yadāhu) what he has earned in the hereafter by his (good and evil) deeds II to make or let s.o. (ھ) gain, win or obtain (ھ s.th.); to let s.o. (ه) share the profit IV to make or let s.o. (ه) gain, win or obtain (ھ s.th.), secure (ه ھ for s.o. s.th.); to impart (ھ ھ or ه to s.o. or to s.th. s.th., also e.g., to the face a certain expression) │ ضد مناعة اكسب (manā‘atan ḍidda) to make immune to ... V to earn (ھ s.th.); to acquire, obtain (ھ s.th.); to gain, win (ھ s.th.) VIII do.; to possess have, own (ھ s.th.); to take on (ھ a new quality, a color, a different aspect, and the like)
كسب kasb acquisition; earnings; gain, profit; winnings; s.th. acquired or gained, acquirement; acquired knowledge, learning
كسب kusb and كسب kusba oil cake
مكسبة and maksib maksab, مكسب
maksiba pl. مكاسب makāsib  gain, profit
تكسب takassub earning, gaining; acquisition; earnings; gain, profit
اكتساب iktisāb acquisition; gaining, winning │ الزمان بمرور اكتساب (bi-murūr z- zamān) prescription, usucapion, acquisition of property or rights by uninterrupted possession of them for a certain period (jur.)
كاسب kāsib winner; earner, provider
مكسب muksib profitable, lucrative كسبرة kasbara coriander (bot.; = كزبرة , q.v.) كستاك kustāk see كستك
كستبان kustubān pl. كساتبين kasātibīn  thimble
كساتك pl. كستيك and kustak köstek) (Turk. كسكت
kasātik watch chain
كستلية (It. sastoletta) kustulēta, kustalēta cutlet, chop
كستنة kastana chestnut (bot.)
كستنائي kastanā’ī maroon, chestnut- colored
كسح kasaḥa a (kasḥ) to sweep; to clean, clean out, empty; -- kasiḥa a (kaṣaḥ) to be crippled; to become a cripple II (eg.) to
 cripple (ه s.o.); to bend, twist, warp (o s.th.) VIII to sweep away (ھ s.th.); to wash away, flush out, remove (ھ s.th.); to overrun (ھ s.th.); to flood, overflow (ھ s.th.), spread, fan out (ھ over s.th.); to plunder, pillage, sack (ھ a captured town); to snatch up, seize (ھ s.th.), take hold (ھ of)
كسح kasḥ sweeping; cleaning; clearing; emptying (e.g., of a latrine); lameness, paralysis, palsy
كساح kusāḥ rachitis, rickets
كساحة kusāḥa sweepings; refuse, garbage, rubbish, trash
كسيح kasīḥ lame, palsied, paralyzed; crippled
اكسح aksaḥ lame, palsied, paralyzed; crippled 825
مكسحة miksaḥa broom
اكتساح iktisāḥ a sweeping away, sweep; removal, elimination; flooding, overflowing, submersion, inundation; rape, seizure, usurpation
al-algām k. كاسحة األلغام kāsiḥa: كاسحة
mine sweeper
مكسح mukassaḥ crippled; cripple; lame person, paralytic
كسد kasada and kasuda u (كساد kasād, كسود kasūd) to find no market, not to move, sell badly (merchandise); to be stagnant, dull, listless (business, market) IV to be dull, listless (market)
كساد kasād unsalableness of merchandise; economic depression, dullness of the market, stagnation of commerce, recession; slump
O مكاسدة mukāsada dumping
كاسد kāsid and كسيد kasīd selling badly, little in demand (merchandise); stagnant, dull, listless (market)
 كسر kasara i (kasr) to break, shatter, fracture ( ھ s.th.); to break open, force open, pry open (ھ a door, and the like); to break (also fig.: power, resistance); to violate, infringe (ھ a legal duty); to destroy, annihilate, rout (ھ s.th.); to defeat (ھ an army); to fold (ھ s.th.); to provide with
the vowel, (ھ a consonant; gram.) │ كسر خاطره to disappoint, disoblige, offend, afront s.o.; كسرت kusirat ir-rīḥu the wind has calmed down; الصمت كسر (ṣamt) to break the silence; العطش كسر (‘aṭaš) to quench the thirst; مراده عن كسره (murādihī) to dissuade or hinder s.o. from carrying out his intention; عينه كسر (‘ainahū) (eg.) to shame s.o., put s.o. to shame; قلبه كسر (qalbahū) to break s.o.’s heart; to discourage s.o.; حدته من كسر (ḥiddatihi) to blunt the edge of s.th., tone down s.th., curb, temper s.th. or s.o. II to break into pieces, fragmentize (ھ s.th.); to shatter, smash (ھ s.th.) V to be broken to pieces, be shattered, be fragmentized; to break, be refracted, be diffracted (also light, rays, phys.); to be refined, civilized VII to get broken; to be defeated, be routed, be broken (force, violence); to break; to be refracted, be diffracted; to abate, subside (e.g., heat), be quenched (thirst) │ انكسرت ساقه (sāquhū) he broke his leg
كسر kasr breaking, fracturing; shattering, fragmentation; -- (pl. كسور kusūr) break, breach, fracture; crack, rupture; fracture of a bone; (pl. كسر kusūr, كسورات) fraction (arith.) │ عشري كسر اعشاري)) (‘ušrī, a‘šārī) decimal fraction; وكسور wa-kusūr (after figures) ... and some, a little over ..., e.g., وكسور جنيه one pound and some, a little over a pound
كسر kasr, kisr: البيت كسر k. al-bait nook of the house; بيته كسر في جثم to live in seclusion, stay in one’s four walls
كسرة kasra defeat, breakdown, collapse; the vowel point for i; nook of the house
كسرة kisra pl. كسر kisar, -āt fragment; a small piece; chunk (of bread); slice (of bread)
كسير kasīr pl. كسرى kasrā, كسارى kasārā broken, fractured, shattered; defeated; see also كسرى alphabetically
O كسارة kassāra nutcracker
كسيرة kusaira diopter (phys.)
كسر maksir: المكسر صلب ṣulb al-m. hard to break, robust, sturdy, hardy, firm, strong; المكسر طيب ṭayyib al-m. standing the test, proving its value, of excellent
 quality; المكاسر لين layyin al-makāsir soft, gentle
تكسير taksīr breaking, fracturing; shattering, fragmentation │ التكسير جمع jam‘ at-t. broken plural (gram.) 826
تكاسر takassur a being broken, breaking; refraction, diffraction (opt.) │ األشعة تكسر t. al-aši‘‘a refraction of rays
انكسار inkisār (state or process of) being broken, brokenness, breaking; fracture; breach, rupture; fragility; defeat, rout; brokenness in spirit, broken-heartedness, dejection; contrition; refraction, diffraction (phys.) │ القلب انكسار ink. al- qalb dejectedness, despondency, contrition
كاسر kāsir breaking, shattering, etc.; (pl. كواسر kawāsir ) rapacious, ferocious, savage (predatory animal) │ الحجر كاسر k. al-ḥajar saxifrage, stonebreak (bot.);طير كاسر (ṭair) bird of prey; الطير كواسر k. aṭ- ṭair predatory birds
مكسور maksūr broken, fractured; shattered, fragmented; defeated; unsuccessful, thwarted, frustrated; bankrupt; having a kasra (consonant; gram.)
مكسر mukassar fragmented, shattered, smashed; broken (also, e.g., language); مكسرات almonds and nuts │ مكسر جمع (jam‘) broken plural (gram.)
 اكسير iksīr elixir
كزرونة see (eg.) kasarōna كسرونة
كسرى kisrā pl. اكاسرة akāsira, اكاسر akāsir  Khosrau; designation of the Persian kings in general
كسع kasa‘a a to chase away (ه s.o.); to strike, shove, push, kick (ه s.o. from behind) VIII to put its tail (ب) between its legs
كسف kasafa i (كسوف kusūf) to be or become dark, gloomy; to be eclipsed, pass through an eclipse (sun); -- to reprimand, reprove ( ه s.o.); to abash, shame, put to shame (ه s.o.) VII to be eclipsed; to be shamed, be ashamed; to blush
كسف kasf darkening, occultation, eclipse; dark, darkness, gloominess
١ كسوفcuaUf occultation, eclipse, solar eclipse
انكساف inkisāf occultation, eclipse, solar eclipse
كاسف kāsif dejected, downcast, sad, worried, grieved; gloomy
كسكس kaskasa to pound, bray, grind, powder, pulverize; (eg.) to retreat, fall back, withdraw
كسكسو kuskusū and كسكسي kuskusī couscous, dish prepared of groats and salt water (staple food in northwest Africa)
كسكاس kuskās, kaskās sieve for preparing couscous
كسل kasila a (kasal) to be lazy, idle, sluggish, indolent, negligent; to idle, loaf II to make lazy or negligent (ه s.o.) VI = I
كسل kasal laziness, sluggishness, idleness, inactivity, loafing, indolence, negligence
كسل kasil and كسول kasūl lazy, idle
كسالن kaslān f. كسلى ة، kaslā, pl. كسالى kasālā, kusālā, كسلى kaslā lazy, sluggish, slothful, indolent, idle, inactive
مكسال miksāl lazybones, sluggard, idler, loafer
تكاسل takāsul laziness, sluggishness, indolence
متكاسل mutakāsil lazy, sluggish, slothful, indolent
كسم kasama i (kasm) to make living (عياله على ‘alā ‘iyālihī for one’s family) II to give form (ھ to s.th.), shape, fashion (ھ s.th.)
كسم kasm cut, style (of a dress); clothing, clothes, costume, fashion; form, shape; manner, mode
كسيم kasīm duty, rate, tax 827
تكسيم taksīm forming, shaping, fashioning, molding; O milling
مكسم mukassam well-shaped, shapely
كسو) and كسا (كسي kasā u (kasw) to clothe, dress, garb, attire (ھ s.o. with or in); to hang, drape, face, line, case (ب or ھ ھ s.th. with), incase (ب or ھ ھ s.th. in); to cover (ب or ھ ھ s.th. with), put, slip (ب or
 ھ ھ over s.th. s.th.) │ كذا صبغة كساه (ṣibgata) to give s.th. the appearance of ..., make s.th. look like ...; -- كسي kasiya a (كسا kasā) to be or get dressed; to dress IV to clothe, dress, garb, attire (ه ھ s.o. with or in) V to be dressed, be clothed, be garbed; to clothe o.s., array o.s., attire o.s. (ب with or in); to cover o.s. VIII do.; to burst into leaf (tree)
كسوة kiswa pl. كسى kusan, kisan, كساو kasāwin clothing, clothes, apparel, attire, raiment; dress, garment; suit of clothes; uniform; draping, lining, casing, facing, paneling, wainscoting (e.g., of walls) │ الشريفة) الكسوة) the kiswa, the covering of the Kaaba (black, brocaded carpet covering the walls of the Kaaba, made annually in Egypt and transported with the pilgrimage caravan to Mecca); التشريفة كسوة full-dress uniform, gala uniform
كساء kisā’ pl. اكسية aksiya garment; dress
تكسية taksiya clothing, dressing; draping, lining, casing, facing, paneling, wainscoting (e.g., of walls); course of stones (of a macadam road)
كش kašša i to recoil (من from)
كشة kušša lock of hair
كشتبان kuštubān, kuštibān pl. كشاتبين kašātibīn 
thimble
كشح kašaḥa a (kašḥ): بالعداوة له كشح (bi- l-‘adāwa) to harbor enmity toward s.o.,
hate s.o.; -- to disperse, scatter, break up (ه a crowd), send away, dismiss, drive away, chase away (ه s.o.) III العداوة في كاشحة (bi-
l-‘adāwa) to harbor enmity toward s.o., hate s.o. VII to be dispersed, be scattered; to disperse, scatter, break up; to be dispelled
كشح kašḥ pl. كشوح kušūḥ region of the hip, haunch, flank, side, waist; Venus’s- shell, cowrie │ على كشح طوى (ṭawā kašḥahū) to keep s.th. to o.s., keep s.th. secret; عن (كشحا) كشحه طوى to turn from s.o., break with s.o.; كشحه واله (wallāhu) to turn one’s back on s.o.
كشاحة kušāḥa secret enmity, rancor, grudge, resentment, hate
كاشح kāšiḥ secret enemy
كشر kašara i (kašr) and II to bare one’s teeth; to grimace; to grin, smile (الى at s.o.); to scowl, glower, bear a grim expression │ اسنانه عن كشر to bare or show one’s teeth; انيابه) نابه عن كشر) do.
كشرة kišra grimace
تكشيرة takšīra (n. vic.) flash of the teeth
مكاشري جاري ھو huwa jārī mukāširī he is my nearest neighbor
انكشاري look up alphabetically
كشط kašaṭa i (kašṭ) to take off (ھ a wrapping, a covering); to pull off (ھ s.th.); to erase (ھ s.th. written); to remove (ھ s.th.); to scratch off, scrape off (ھ s.th., ب e.g., with a knife so as to clean it)
مكشط mikšaṭ erasing knife
كشب kašafa i (kašf) to pull away, remove, take off, throw open, lift, raise (ھ a covering, a curtain, a veil, etc., عن from); to reveal, disclose, uncover, expose, bare (ھ or عن s.th.); to clear up (ھ or عن s.th.), shed light (ھ or عن on); to show, demonstrate (ھ or عن s.th.); to open up, lay open, lay bare (ھ or عن s.th.); to bring to light (ھ or عن s.th.); to study, scrutinize, 828 investigate, examine (عن s.th.); to examine medically (على s.o.) │ عن القناع كشف to unveil, unmask s.o. or s.th.; طبيا عليه كشف (ṭibbīyan) to examine
s.o. medically ; ساقھا عن الحرب كشفت (ḥarbu) the war was or become violent, flared up; war broke out III to discuss, reveal, manifest, demonstrate, show (ه ب to s.o. s.th.), evince ( toward s.o. s.th.); to
 scientifically); to find out, detect, uncover (ھ s.th.) X to seek to discover (ھ s.th.); to explore (ھ s.th.); to investigate (ھ s.th.), search, inquire (ھ into s.th.); to scout, reconnoiter (mil.); to discover (ھ s.th., scientifically); to detect, spot, seek out, search out, find out (ھ s.th.)
كشف kašf uncovering, disclosure; baring, exposure, unveiling; revelation, illumination (mys.); investigation, inquiry, search, quest, study; examination, scrutiny; inspection; boy scout movement;
-- (pl. كشوف kušūf, كشوفات kušūfāt) report, account; statement, specification, enumeration; table, schedule, chart; list, roster, index, register, inventory; pl. كشوف discoveries │ طبي كشف ṭibbī) medical examination; االقتراع كشف muster roll; كشف الحساب bill, invoice
كشفي kašfī of or pertaining to boy scouts
│ كشفية حركة (ḥaraka) boy scout movement
كشاف kaššāf pl. كشافة kaššāfa discoverer, inventor; explorer, reconnoiterer, scout; boy scout │ O كھربائي كشاف (kahrabā’ī) searchlight; كشاف مصباح (miṣbāḥ) and نور كشاف (nūr) pl. كشافة انوار do.
كشافة kaššāfa exploration; reconnaissance, reconnoitering, scouting (mil.); boy scout movement, scouting
كشافي kišāfī of boy scouts, boy scout (adj.)
كشيف kašīf uncovered, open, exposed
اكتشاف iktišāf uncovering, disclosure,
make known (ب or ه
 ھ to s.o. s.th.),
 detection, spotting, location; (pl. -āt)
inform (ب or ه ھ s.o. of) │ بالعداوة كاشفه (bi- l-‘adāwa) to manifest open hostility toward s.o. V to be uncovered, be exposed, be laid open, be bared, be disclosed, be revealed, be brought to light; to come to light, become visible, manifest itself, show; to open, be opened up (عن شيء so as to reveal s.th.) │ ال عن األمر تكشف شيء (amru) the matter turned out to be of no consequence; العجز منتھى عن تكشف (muntahā l-‘ajz) to show o.s. utterly helpless VII to be removed, be lifted, be raised (veil); to be uncovered, be disclosed, be revealed, become manifest ( ل to s.o.) VIII to discover (ھ s.th., esp.
 (scientific) discovery
استكشاف istikšāf uncovering, clarification, elucidation; discovery; close observation; reconnaissance, reconnoitering, scouting (mil.) │ طائرة االستكشاف reconnaissance plane; االستكشاف المدى البعيد (madā) long-range reconnaissance
استكشافي istikšāfī explorational, exploratory, of discovery, reconnaissance-, scout- (in compounds)
كاشف kāšif pl. كشفة kašafa uncovering, revealing, etc.; serving exploratory purposes, instrumental in reconnaissance,
conducive to discovery, detection or disclosure; examiner, investigator, discoverer; supervisor, inspector; (Eg.) head of a muqāṭa‘a, district chief (obsolete); detector (radio); كاشف and كاشفة reagent (chem.) │ كاشف ضوء (ḍau’) pl. كاشفة اضواء and كاشف نور (nūr) pl. كاشفة انوار search-light; O األلغام كاشف زورق (zauraq) mine-locating craft, mine sweeper; كاشف بلوري (ballūrī, billaurī) crystal detector (radio); المحيط كاشف k. al-muḥīṭ periscope; بالكاشف بان (bāna) to manifest itself clearly and unmistakably 829
مكشوف maksūf bared, exposed, uncovered, open, roofless, coverless, unveiled, naked, bare; (mil.) open, undefended, devoid of military installations or fortifications; uncovered (com.) │ الرأس مكشوف m. ar-ra’s, bareheaded, hatless; بالمكشوف or على المكشوف openly, publicly, overtly, for everyone to see
مكتشف muktašif discoverer, explorer
مكتشفات muktašafāt (scientific) discoveries
 كشك kušk pl. اكشاك akšāk kiosk; summer- house, pavilion, cabin, log cabin; hut, shed, shanty; (telephone) booth; stall, stand, booth (at a fair, etc.) │ االستحمام كشك bathhouse; beach chair; االشارات كشك k. al- ilšārāt block station, signal box (railroad); الديدبان كشك k. ad-daidabān sentry box; O محول كشك (muḥawwil) transformer house
 كشك kišk a dough made of bulgur and sour milk, cut into small pieces, dried and need for the preparation of other dishes (so in Egypt; there are several other ways of preparing it) │ (eg.) الماز كشك kišk almāz asparagus
كشكش kaškaša to rustle; to flee, run away; (eg.) to pleat
كشكش kaškaš pl. كشاكش kašākiš  seam; hem, edge, border
kaškašīya riwāya رواية كشكشية
burlesque, popular comedy
كشكول kaškūl beggar’s bag; scrapbook; album
كشمش kišmiš a kind of currants
 كشمير kašmīr  Kashmir (region in NE India); kašmīr cashmere (a soft, twilled woolen fabric)
كشنى kušnā lentil tare, slender vetch (bot.)
□ كض (for كظ) V to be replete, overfull, overloaded, overburdened VIII to be overfilled, be replete (ب with s.th.), be chock-full
تكضكض takaḍkūḍ overexertion, overstrain, overburdening
كظ kaẓẓa u (kaẓẓ) to fill, overfill (ھ s.th.); to burden, weight, encumber (ھ s.th.); to overstuff, surfeit, cloy (ھ the stomach)VIII to be crammed full, be jam- packed, be overcrowded (ب with, esp. with people); to sate o.s. eat one’s fill; to be overstuffed, be surfeited, be cloyed (ب with); to be abundant, copious, plentiful
كظة kiẓẓa gorging, cloying, overstuffing (of the stomach); surfeit
كظيظ kaẓīẓ overfilled, overstuffed, cloyed, surfeited
مكتظ muktaẓ overcrowded (ب with, esp. with people), crammed full, jam-packed ( ب with), chock-full (ب of)
كظر kuẓr suet
كظم kaẓama i (kaẓm, كظوم kuẓūm) to conceal or suppress (ھ one’s anger); to be mum, keep silent
كظيم kaẓīm filled with anger
كعب ka‘aba u i (كعوب ku‘ūb) to be full and round, be swelling (breasts) II to make cubic, to cube (ھ s.th.); to dice (ھ s.th.)
كعب ka‘b pl. كعاب ki‘āb, كعوب ku‘ūb knot, knob, node (of cane); joint, articulation; ankle, anklebone; heel (of the fact, of a shoe); ferrule; die; cube; high rank, fame, glory, honor │ الكتاب كعب (pl. كعوب) spine of a book; كعبا ارقى arqā ka‘ban abler, more capable, more qualified, more efficient; الكعب عالي رجل rajul ‘ālī l-k. a distinguished, capable, successful man; الكعب علو ‘ulūw al-k. high rank, outstanding position; كعبھم ذھب their days of glory are past 830
كعب ku‘b breasts, bosom
كعبة ka‘ba pl. ka‘abāt cube, cubic structure; الكعبة the Kaaba (in Mecca); (fig.) shrine; object of veneration, focus of interest
كعبي ka‘bī cubic
كعبة ku‘ba virginity
كعاب ka‘āb having swelling breasts, buxom (girl)
كعيب ابو abū ku‘aib (eg.) mumps (med.)
تكعيب tak‘īb cubing, dicing; raising to the third power, cubing
تكعيبة tak‘ība trellis, espalier
تكعيبي tak‘ībī cubic
كاعب kā‘ib pl. كواعب kawā‘ib  well- developed, full and round, swelling (bosom); having swelling breasts, buxom (girl); كواعب buxom girls
مكعب muka‘‘ab cube-shaped, cubiform, cubic; (pl. -āt) cube │ مكعب قدم (qadam) cubic foot; مكعب متر (mitr) cubic meter
كعبرة ku‘bura and كعبورة ku‘būra pl. كعابر ka‘ābir  knotty excrescence, knot, knob, node; كعبرة radius (anat.) │ الكعبرة عظم ‘aẓm al-k. radius (anat.)
مكعبر muka‘bar knotty, knobbed, gnarled
كعبل ka‘bala (eg.) to trip up (ه s.o.); to make (ه s.o.) stumble
كعك ka‘k (coll.; n. un. ة) cake; designation of various kinds of pastry, also of small baked goods; pretzel (syr.)
كعم ka‘ama a (ka‘m) to muzzle (ھ a camel); to gag (ه s.o.); to cap, seal (ھ a vessel)
كغم abbreviation of كيلوغرام kīlogrām kilogram
كف kaffa u (kaff) to border, edge, hem (ھ a garment); to desist, refrain (عن from), cease, forbear (عن doing s.th.), give up, stop (عن s.th.); to renounce, waive, forgo ( عن s.th.), abstain (عن from); to hold back, restrain (ه عن s.o. from); to hinder, prevent (ه عن s.o. from); to avert (عن s.th.); to check, curb, restrict (من s.th.) │ بصره كف kaffa (and pass. kuffa) baṣaruhū to become blind II to hem (ھ a garment) V to beg VII to desist, refrain, abstain (عن from) X to hold out the hand with an
 imploring gesture, beg, practice begging; to shade one’s eyes with the hand; to coil (snake); to surround (ل or حول s.o., s.th.), flock around s.o. or s.th. (حول ل،)
كف kaff desistance, refraining (عن from); abstaining, abstention (من from); cessation, suspension, stop, stoppage, discontinuation (عن of s.th.); -- kaff f., pl. كفوف kufūf, اكف akuff palm of the hand; glove; paw, foot, claw (of an animal); slap; scale (of a balance); handful; quire; bar (of chocolate) │ مريم كف k. mayam (eg.) agnus castus, chaste tree (Vitex agnus-castus; bot.); rose of Jericho, resurrection plant (Anastatica hierochuntica L.; bot.); الجذماء الكف (jadmā’) star α in the constellation Cetus; الخضيب الكف star β in Cassiopeia; األسد كف
k. al-asad lion’s-leaf (bot.); على حياته وضع كفه (ḥayātahū) to risk one’s life; األكف استدر istadarra l-akuffa to secure generous contributions
كفة kiffa, kaffa pl. كفف kifaf, كفاف kifāf
palm of the hand; scale (of a balance)
كفة kaffa: بارود كفة k. bārūd (eg.) cartridge pouch
كفة kuffa pl. كفف kufaf edge, seam, hem, border
كفاف kafāf sufficiency, sufficient means for a living
كفاف kifāf border, edge, fringe, seam, hem 831
كفافة kifāfa hemming; hem
al-baṣar k. كفيف البصر │ blind kafīf كفيف
blind
كافة kāffa totality, entirety; (with foll. genit.) all; the people, the masses, the populace; kāffatan all without exception, one and all; altogether, in the aggregate, collectively
blind makāfīf مكافيف pl. makfūf مكفوف
كفأ kafa’a a (kaf’) to turn around, turn over, reverse, invert (ھ s.th.); to turn away, turn aside, turn back (من from) III to reward (ه s.o.); to requite,























return, repay,
recompense (ھ ب s.th. with); to compensate, make up (ھ ب for s.th. with); to be similar, equal (ھ to s.th.), equal (ھ s.th.), be commensurate (ھ with); to measure up, come up (ھ to s.th.), compare favorably (ھ with) IV to turn over, reverse, invert (ھ s.th.) VI to be equal, be on a par; to (counter)balance each other, be perfectly matched VII to be turned away, be turned aside; to be changed, be altered; to recede, change, fade (color); to turn back, withdraw, retreat, fall back, give way; to be inverted, be reversed, be turned around or over; to fall down. tumble, topple
كفء kaf’, kif’, kuf’ pl. اكفاء akfā’, كفاء kifā’ equal, alike; adequate, appropriate, suitable, fit (ل for); equal (ل to s.o.), a match (ل for); qualified, capable, able, competent, efficient
كفوء kufū’, كفؤ kufu’ equal, comparable (
ل to), a match (ل for)
كفاء kifā’ an equivalent
كفاء kafā’ equality; adequacy, adequateness
 كفاءة kafā’a equality; adequacy, adequateness; comparableness; fitness, suitability, appropriateness; competence, efficiency, ability, capability; pl. كفاءات qualifications, abilities, capabilities
مكافأة mukāfa’a pl. -āt requital; recompense, remuneration; compensation, indemnification, indemnity; reward; stipend
تكافؤ takāfu’ mutual correspondence, equivalence; homogeneity, sameness
انكفاء inkifā’ retreat, withdrawal
مكافئ mukāfi’ equal, (a)like, of the same kind, homogeneous, corresponding, commensurate, equivalent
متكافئ mutakāfi’ alike, (mutually) corresponding, commensurate, equivalent, equal
كفت kafata i (kaft) to restrain, detain, turn away, prevent, hold back (ه من s.o. from) II to plate (ھ ب s.th. with); to inlay (ھ s.th.)
كفت kift cooking pot
كفتة kufta meat balls, hamburgers, oblong or round │ كفتة سمك (samak) fried fish cakes; بطاطس كفتة potato dumplings stuffed with meat
كفيت takfīt inlaid work, inlay; plating, platework
مكفت mukaffat inlaid; coated, overlaid, plated
كفح kafḥ a (kafḥ) to face frankly, confront, encounter or meet face to face (ه s.o.) III = I; to combat (ه s.o., ھ s.th.), fight, battle, struggle, contend (ه against); to defend (عن s.th.), fight (عن for) │ اموره كافح (umūrahū) to manage one’s affairs personally
كفاح kifāḥ and مكافحة mukāfaḥa opposition, fight, battle, struggle (with genit.: against); contention, strife
 كفر kafara i (kafr) to cover, hide (ھ s.th.); -- (kufr, كفران kufrān, كفور kufūr) to be irreligious, be an infidel, not to believe (
<Iبا in God); <Iبا كفر also: to blaspheme God, curse, swear; to 632 renege one’s faith. become an infidel; to be ungrateful ( ب or ھ for a benefit) II to cover, hide (ھ s.th.); to expiate (عن s.th.); to do penance,
atone, make amends (عن ب for s.th. by or with); to grant remission (عن ھ to s.o. of his sins); to forgive (عن or ھ ل s.th. to s.o.), grant pardon (عن or ھ ل for s.th. to s.o.); to make (ه s.o.) an infidel, seduce (ه s.o.), o unbelief; to accuse of infidelity, charge with unbelief (ه s.o.) IV to make (ه s.o.) an infidel; to call (ه s.o.) an infidel, accuse (ه s.o.) of infidelity
كفر kafr pl. كفور kufūr small village, hamlet
كفر kufr and كفران kufrān unbelief, infidelity │ <Iبا كفر godlessness, atheism; blasphemy, profanity; بالنعمة كفران (ni’ma) ingratitude, ungratefulness
كفار kaffār infidel, unbeliever
كفارة kaffāra penance, atonement (عن for a sin), expiation (عن of); reparation, amends; expiatory gifts, expiations (distributed to the poor at a funeral)
تكفير takfīr expiation (عن of), atonement, penance (عن for a sin); seduction to infidelity; charge of unbelief
كافر kāfir pl. –ūn, كفار kuffār, كفرة kafara, كفار kifār irreligious, unbelieving; unbeliever, infidel, atheist; ungrateful │ بالنعمة كافر (ni’ma) ungrateful
 كافور look up alphabetically
كفس kafisa a (kafas) to be bandy-legged VII do.
kufs كفس pl. kafsā’ , كفساء f. akfas , اكفس
bandy-legged
كفكف kafkafa to hold back (ھ tears)
كفل kafala u (kafl, كفالة kafāla) to feed, support (ه s.o.), provide (ه for s.o.; عائلة ‘ā’ilatan for a family); -- kafala u i, kafila a and kafula u (kafl, كفول kufūl, كفالة kafāla) to vouch, answer, go bail, be guaranty, be or stand sponsor, be responsible, liable, answerable (ب for); to guarantee, sponsor (ه s.o.); to be legal guardian (ه of s.o.); to secure; to warrant, ensure (ھ s.th.); to guarantee (ھ ل s.th. to s.o.); O to cover, back (currency with gold) II to feed, support (ه s. o.), provide (ه for); to admit as security sponsor or bail (ه s.o.); to name sponsor, ask to be security or to go bail, appoint security or bail (ه s.o.) III to conclude an agreement, make a contract (ه
 with s.o.) IV to appoint as security, sponsor or bail (ه s.o.), make (ه s.o.) go bail V to be security, go bail, vouch, be or become responsible, answerable or liable ( ل ب to s.o. for), be sponsor (ل ب of s.o. for s.th.), guarantee (ل ب to s.o. s.th.); to obligate o.s. pledge o.s. (ل ب to s.o. to do s.th.); to undertake, take upon o.s. (ب s.th.) VI to vouch for each other, guarantee each other
كفل kafl guaranty, warranty
كفل kafal pl. اكفال akfāl, كفول kufūl rump, buttocks; croup of a horse
كفالة kafāla bail, guaranty, security, sponsorship; pledge, deposit, surety, collateral │ مالية كفالة (mālīya) surety, security; bail; caution money; بالنفس كفالة (nafs) bail (esp. for due appearance of a person in court; Isl. Law); فالن كفالة في under the protection or tutelage of s.o., in s.o.’s custody
كفيل kafīl pl. كفالء kufalā’  responsible, liable, answerable; bail, bailsman, security, surety, sponsor, bondsman; guarantor (ب of s.th.); vouching (ب for s.th.), guaranteeing (ب s.th.); protector; legal guardian │ بالنفس كفيل (nafs) bail, bailsman (esp. one guaranteeing the due appearance of a person in court; Isl. Law) 833
تكافل takāful mutual or joint responsibility; solidarity; mutual agreement
كافل kāfil pl. كفل kufal breadwinner, supporter, provider; bail, bailsman, security, surety, sponsor, bondsman; protector; legal guardian
به) مكفول) makfūl (bihī) guaranteed; covered, backed (banknotes in circulation)
كفن kafana i (kafn) to cover with a winding sheet, to shroud, dress for the grave (ھ the deceased) II do.; to wrap (ھ ب s.th. in), cover (ھ ب s.th. with)
كفن kafn saltless
كفن kafan pl. اكفان akfān shroud, winding sheet
كفھر IV kafhara (اكفھرار ikfihrār) to be dark, grow dark, darken, be or become gloomy
اكفھرار ikfihrār darkness, dark; dusk, gloom, gloominess
مكفھر mukfahirr dim, dusky, gloomy; clouded, overcast; grave, sullen, melancholy
كفى kafā i (كفاية kifāya) to be enough, sufficient (ه for s.o.), suffice (ه s.o.); to meet all requirements; to protect (ه ه s.o. from s.o., ه ھ s.o. from s.th.); to save, spare (ه ھ s.o. a trouble) │ وكفى wa-kafā and that’s all! enough of that! that’s enough! عنك الل كفى may God give satisfaction in your stead, or, may God make up for your shortcoming (said to s.o. making a mistake, or showing himself inadequate); وكيال <Iبا كفى (wakīlan) God is the best protector; ان حزنا كفى (ḥazanan) it is sad enough that ...; كذا مؤنة كفاه (mu’nata) to save s.o. the trouble of ... III to be sufficient, enough (ه for s.o.), suffice (ه s.o.); to requite, repay, recompense, reward (ه ب s.o. with) VIII to be content, content o.s. (ب with s.th.)
كفاية kifāya sufficient amount, degree, extent, etc., sufficiency; that which suffices for performing a duty, a task, etc.; capability, capacity, ability, qualification; appropriateness, suitability, fitness; competence, efficiency, skill │ بالكفاية sufficiently, enough; القتال كفاية fighting power; الجنسية الكفاية عدم ‘adam al-k. al- jinsīya sexual impotence; كفاية ھذا في enough of that, that’s enough
كفي kafīy sufficient, enough
مكافاة mukāfāh reward; gratification اكتفاء iktifā’ contentedness, contentment كاف kāfin pl. كفاة kufāh sufficient,
enough, adequate; appropriate, suitable, suited, fit; capable, able, qualified, skilled, skillful, competent, efficient
مكتف muktafin contented, content
 كال kilā, f. كلتا kiltā; كلي kilai, f. كلتي kiltai (with dependent genit. or suffix) both (of); see also alphabetically
 كل kalla i (kall, كلة killa, كالل kalāl, ; كاللة kalāla, كلول kulūl, كلولة kulūla) to be or become tired, fatigued, weary, exhausted, weak; to be dim, dull, languid, expreosionless, (glance, eyes); to become
 blunt (sword) │ يكل ال indefatigable, untiring II to crown (ه s.o., also fig. ھ s.th.); (Chr.) to perform the marriage ceremony
(priest); to become dull, obtuse, expressionless (face); to become blunt (sword) │ بالنجاح كلل kullila bi-l-najāḥ to be crowned by success IV to make languid or tired, to weary, tire, fatigue, exhaust, wear out, harass, torment (ه s.o.); to dim (ھ the glance) V to be crowned; to wear a crown; (Chr.) to be married
كل kall weariness, tiredness, fatigue, exhaustion; dimness, dullness; dull, dim, feeble (glance, mind) 834
كلة killa pl. -āt, كلل kilal thin veil, drape, curtain; mosquito net
كلل kalal, كالل kalāl and كاللة kalāla weariness, tiredness, fatigue, exhaustion; dimness, dullness
كليل kalīl exhausted, tired, weary, faint, languid; weak, feeble; dull, blunt
اكليل iklīl pl. اكاليل akālīl , اكلة akilla crown; diadem; chaplet, wreath, garland, festoon; tonsure (Chr.); wedding, marriage ceremony (Chr.); umbel (bot.) │ الجبل اكليل i. al-jabal rosemary (bot.); اكليل الشوك i. aš-šauk crown of thorns; الملك اكليل
i. al-malik yellow sweet clover, melilot (Melilotus officinalis L.; bot.)
تكليل taklīl coronation, crowning
كال kāll tired, fatigued, faint, languid
مكلل mukallal adorned with a wreath, crowned; married (Chr.)
 كل kull totality, entirety; everyone, each one, anyone; (with foil. def. noun) whole, entire, all; (with fall. indef. noun) every; الكل the whole. all, everything │ بالكل on the whole, in the aggregate, taken altogether, in bulk; بالكل الكل everything, all-embracing, all-comprehensive, all- powerful; وفالن وفالن فالن من كل (kullun min) A as well as B as well as C; كل على ‘alā kullin in any case, at any rate; كله kulluhū he entirely, all of him, it entirely, all of it; ذلك كل kullu dālika all that; البيت كل kullu l-baiti or كله البيت al-b. kulluhū the whole house; الرجال كل or كلھم الرجال all men; الحقيقة كل الحقيقة (kullu l-ḥ.) the whole
truth, nothing but the truth; السر كل السر (sirr) a very great secret; الخير كل الخير (kair) true or complete happiness; رجل كل kullu rajulin every man; شيء كل k. šai’in every thing, everything, all; احد كل k. aḥadin and واحد كل k. wāḥidin every (single) one, each one; من كل kullu man everyone who, whoever, whosoever; ما كل kullu mā all that …, whatever, whatsoever; ان األمر في ما كل k. mā fī l-amri anna there is no more to it than ..., it’s nothing but ...; وقت كل kulla waqtin at any time, always; ايام سبعة كل في fī kulli sab‘ati ayyāmin in each seven days, every seven days; الف لكل li-kulli alfin per (one) thousand
كلما kullamā whenever; the more ..., in the same measure as … │ كلما – كلما the more -- the more
كلي kullī total, entire, all-round, overall, sweeping, comprehensive, complete; absolute, universal
كلية kullīya totality, entirety; integrity, wholeness, entireness, completeness; (pl.
-āt) faculty, school (of a university); college; institute of higher learning, academy, secondary school; كليات the complete works (of an author); الكليات the five logical predicates or general conceptions (philos.); kullīyatan wholly, entirely, totally, absolutely │ بالكلية on the whole, in the aggregate, altogether; -- ال بالكلية not at all, absolutely not; بكليته in its entire being, completely, totally, entirely, wholly; التجارة كلية commercial college; كلية حربية (ḥarbīya) military academy
 كلة kulla pl. كلل kulal bullet; cannon ball; shell, grenade; a marble
كال kallā not at all, on the contrary; by no means! certainly not! never! no! (see also  كال ثم كال │ كل (tumma) a thousand times no! not at all!
كأل kala’a a (كلء kal’, كالء kilā’, كالءة kilā’a) to guard, preserve, watch, protect (ه s.o.) VIII to find no sleep (eye)
كأل kala’ pl. اكالء aklā’ grass, herbage, pasture
كلوء kalū’: العين كلوء k. al-‘ain sleepless, awake 835
 كالسكي kilāsikī classic(a1)
كالكس kalāks pl. -āt horn of an automobile
كلب kaliba a (kalab) to be seized by hydrophobia; to become mad, crazy; to covet greedily (على s.th.) VI to rage, rave, storm; to fan, pounce, rush in (على upon), assail (على s.o.); to assail each other, rush against each other X to be raging, raving, rabid, furious, mad, frenzied, possessed
كلب kalb pl. كالب kilāb dog │ األكبر الكلب the constellation Canis Major with its main star Sirius; األصغر الكلب the constellation Canis Minor with its main star Procyon; البحر كلب k. al-baḥr shark; الماء كلب otter; beaver
كلبة kalba pl. -āt bitch
كلبي kalbī canine (adj.)
كلب kalab rabies, hydrophobia; burning thirst; greed (على for)
كلب kalib affected with rabies, rabid; mad; greedy
كالليب pl. kallūb كلوب and kullāb كالب
kalālīb  hook; cramp
كالبة kullāba pl. -āt (pair of) pincers, tongs
كليب kalīb pl. كلبى kalbā affected with rabies, rabid, raging
تكالب takālub fierce struggle, dogfight, free-for-all, melee, brawl; avidity, greed
مكلوب maklūb rabid, frenzied, crazed, possessed
كلبش kalabš manacles, handcuffs
كلت kalata i to pour, pour out (ھ s.th.)
كلح kalaḥa a (كالح kulāḥ, كلوح kulūḥ) to frown, scowl, look gloomy IV and V do.
كلحة kalaḥa zone around the mouth, mien, facial expression
كالح kāliḥ grave, austere, somber, gloomy; fallow, livid, dull grey; turned colorless, faded
كلخ kalk giant fennel (Ferula communis L.; Ferula sinaica B.; bos.); -- (eg.) kalak ammoniac
الكلدان al-kaldān the Chaldeans
كلداني kaldānī Chaldean (adj. and n.); astrologer
 كلس II to plaster with lime, whitewash (ھ s.th.); to calcine, calcify (ھ s.th.)
كلس kils lime
كلسي kilsī calcic, limy, lime- (in compounds) │ كلسية حجارة limestone
كالسة kallāsa limekiln
مكلس mukallas calcified
  كلسة (It. calza) kalsa pl. -āt stocking
كوليس see كواليس
كلسون (Fr. caleçon) kalsūn pl. -āt (pair of men’s) drawers
كلسيطة (It. calzeta) kalsīṭa pl. كالسط kalāsiṭ 
stocking
كلسيوم kalsiyōm calcium
كلف kalifa a (kalaf) to become brownish red (face); to become freckled, be covered with freckles; to like (ب s.th.), be intent, bent, set. keen (ب on), be very attached (ب to s.o. or s.th.), be very fond (ب of s.o. or s.th.); to be in love, fall in love (ب with s.o.) II to commission, charge, entrust (ه s.o., ب or ھ with), assign (ب or ه ھ to s.o. a task, a job); to cost (ه ھ s.o. a certain amount) │ خاطره كلف (kāṭirahū) (eg.) to take the trouble, go to the trouble, bother; to put s.o. to the trouble, bother s.o.; كلفه شططا (šaṭaṭan) to overtask s.o., expect or demand too much of s.o.; (مشقة ... or
٦٣٨ ... عناء نفسه كلف (... مؤونة (‘anā’a, ma‘ūnata, mašaqqata) to take the trouble to ..., to bother to ..., go to the trouble of
…; باھظا ثمنا كلفه (tamanan) to cost s.o. dearly; األمر كلفه مھما (mahmā, amr) whatever it may cost him, at any cost V to burden o.s., be burdened (ھ or ب with s.th.); to take upon o.s. (ھ a job, a task, coats, an office, etc.); to take over, defray, have to bear (ھ s.th., e.g., expenses); to do reluctantly or unwillingly, do in a studied or affected manner, simulate, feign, affect (ھ s.th.); to force o.s. (ھ to do s.th.). do s.th. (ھ) with difficulty, e.g., الضحك تكلف (ḍaḥk) to force a laugh; to be affected, mannered, unnatural, stiff, formal, ceremonious, punctilious, stand on ceremony; to employ (ھ e.g., care), spend
 (ھ على an amount for); to cost (على s.o., ھ
so-and-so much)
كلف kalaf (coll.; n. un. ة) freckles │ كلف الشمس k. aš-šams sunspots
كلف kalif very much in love (ب with), very attached (ب to), very fond (ب of)
كلفة kulfa pl. كلف kulaf discomfort; trouble, inconvenience; nuisance; ceremonial, ceremony, formality, ceremoniousness, affectedness of behavior, affectation, mannerism, pose; costs, expenses, expenditure, outlay; trimmings, fittings, accessories, notions, ornaments (buttons, buckles, clasps, braiding, lace, etc.); lady’s maid │ الكلف الشمسية (šamsīya) the sunspots
كالف kallāf stable hand, hostler, groom
كالفي kallāfī hirer of donkeys
kulf كلف pl. kalfā’ , كلفاء f. aklaf , اكلف
brownish red, russet; freckled; spotted
تكليف taklīf pl. تكاليف takālīf  burdening, bothering, troubling, inconveniencing; commissioning, charging, authorization; commandment (of God); burden, annoyance, nuisance, bother; trouble, inconvenience, discomfort; fuss, ado; formality, ceremonial of courtesy, ceremony; expenses, expenditure, outlay, costs, charges, overhead; prime cost; taxes, imposts, duties; taxation, encumbrance with a tax; legal capacity (Isl. Law) │ تكليف بال informal(ly), unceremonious(ly), without (standing on) ceremony; التكليف كشف kašf at-t. terrier; المعيشة تكاليف t. al-ma‘īša cost of living
تكلف takalluf constraint, unnaturalness of manner; mannerism, airs, affectation, affected behavior; studied, unnatural manner; dissimulation, hypocrisy
مكلف mukallaf commissioned, authorized, charged (ب with); obligated, under obligation, liable (ب to do s.th.), responsible (ب for); bound, obliged (ب to do s.th.); subject to taxation, taxable; taxpayer; obligated to observe the precepts of religion (Isl. Law); legally capable, sane in mind, compos mentis (Isl. Law) │ بالشؤون مكلف chargé d’affaires, diplomatic envoy
مكلفة mukallafa pl. -āt (eg.) terrier
متكلف mutakallaf formal, ceremonial, ceremonious; affected, studied, forced, outward., sham, false, artificial │ ضحكة متكلفة (ḍahka) forced laugh
كلك kalak pl. -āt (ir.) raft of inflated skins كلكتا kalkattā Calcutta (city in NE India) كالكيع kalākī‘ : العظام كالكيع k. al-‘iẓām bone
fragments
كلكل kalkala and II takalkala to become callous (skin)
كلكل kalkal pl. كالكل kalākil  chest, thorax │ كلكله تحت ,كالكله تحت under the 837 oppressive burden of s.th.; بكلكله to oppress
s.o. gravely, weigh heavily upon s.o.
كلكلة kalkala callosity, callus
مكلكل mukalkal callous (skin)
كلم II to address (ه s.o.), speak, talk (ه to or with s.o.) III to speak, talk, converse (ه with s.o.) V to speak, talk (مع with or to s.o., عن or على about, of); to utter, express, voice, say (ب or ھ s.th.)
kilām كالم kulūm, كلوم pl. kalm كلم
wound, cut, slash
كلمة kalima pl. -āt (coll. كلم kalim) word; speech, address; utterance, remark, saying; aphorism, maxim; brief announcement, a few (introductory) words; short treatise; importance, weight, influence, authority, ascendancy, powerful position │ فكلمة كلمة kalimatan fa- kalimatan word by word, literally; بكلمة اخرى (ukra) in other words; كلمة القى alqā kalimatan to make a speech, give a public address; معك كلمة لي I’ve got to talk to you; على كلمتھم جمعوا (jama’ū kalimatahum) they decided unanimously to ..., they were unanimous about ...; كلمتھم اجتمعت ijtama’at kalimatuhum they united, joined forces, came to an agreement; على كلمتھم اجتمعت they were agreed that ...; الكلمة توحيد or جمع الكلمة jam’ al-k. union, joining of forces, unanimity; الكلمة اتحاد ittiḥād al-k. concord, agreement, harmony; الكلمة تقسيم dissension, variance, disunion; كلمته اعلى (a’lā) to raise the prestige of s.o.; الكلمة علو ‘ulūw al-k. and العليا الكلمة (‘ulyā) supremacy, hegemony; كلمته قال he said what he had to say, he had his say; ﷲ كلمة the word of
 God, the Holy Scriptures; O المرور كلمة password, watchword, parole; العشر الكلمات (‘ašr) the ten Commandments; تمھيدية كلمة (tamhīdīya) preface; السر كلمة k. as-sirr, (ir.) السر كلم kalim as-sirr parole, watch- word, countersign
كالم kalām talking, speaking; speech; language, mode of expression, style; talk, conversation, discussion; debate, dispute, controversy; words, word, saying, utterance, statement, remark; aphorism, maxim, phrase, idiom, figure of speech; (gram.) sentence, clause │ بالكالم orally, verbally; بالكالم فمه فتح (famahū) to open one’s mouth in order to say s.th., prepare to say s.th.; فارغ كالم idle talk, prattle, poppycock, bosh, nonsense; الكالم طريق manner of speaking, diction; الكالم علم ‘ilm al-k. scholastic theology (Isl.); الكالم كثير talkative, loquacious, garrulous; الكالم لغة lugat al-k. colloquial language, everyday speech
كالمي kalāmī of or pertaining to speech or words, speech-, word- (in oompounds), verbal; spoken, oral; scholastic, theological │ كالمية مشادة (mašādda) battle of words, dispute, altercation
كليم kalīm pl. كلمى kalmā wounded, injured; sore; -- (pl. كلماء kulamā’) person addressed; speaker, spokesman, mouthpiece │ ﷲ كليم epithet of Moses
كليم see also alphabetically
كلماني kalmānī, kalamānī, killimānī
eloquent; fluent speaker
تكالم tiklām, tikillām and تكالمة tiklāma, tikillāma eloquent; good talker, conversationalist; talkative, loquacious, garulous
مكالمة mukālama talk, conversation, discussion │ تليفونية مكالمة telephone conversation
تكلم takallum speaking; talk, conversation; speech
متكلم mutakallim speaking (act. part.); speaker, spokesman; first person (gram.);
Muslim theologian, scholastic 838
كلما kullamā see  كل
كالون look up alphabetically
كالوى □ kulan, كلى pl. kulwa كلوة and kulya كلية
kalāwī kidney
كلوي kulwī of or pertaining to the kidneys, renal, nephric, nephritic, nephro- (in compounds) │ كلوي التھاب inflammation of the kidneys, nephritis; كلوي مغص (magṣ) renal colic
كليشيه kilīšēh pl. -āt cliché
كليم kilīm pl. اكلمة aklima kilim, carpet, rug (usually long and narrow)
 كم kam (interrogative and exclamatory particle with foll. noun in acc.) how much? how many! how much! │ لك ولد كم (waladan) how many sons do you have? مرة كم (marratan) or مرة من كم how many times? how often? how often! بالحري كم (ḥarīy) how much more ...! how much rather ...! بكم for how much? how much (is it)?
نظرية الكم │ quantity amount, kamm كم 
naẓariyat al-k. quantum theory (phys.)
كمي kammī quantitative
كمية kammīya pl. -āt amount, quantity, magnitude
 كم kamma u (kamm) to cover, cover up, conceal, hide, cloak (ھ s.th.); to plug up, stop up (ھ s.th.); to muzzle (ھ s.o.) │ كم فمه (famahū) to stop s.o.’s mouth, silence
s.o. II to muzzle (ھ s.o.); to muffle s.o.’s ( ه) mouth; O to spike (ھ a cannon); to provide with sleeves (ھ a garment) IV to provide with sleeves (ھ a garment)
kimama كممة akmām, اكمام pl. kumm كم
sleeve
كم kimm pl. اكمام akmām, اكمة akimma, كمام kimām, اكاميم akāmīm  calyx (bot.); perianth (bot.)
كمام kimām muzzle
كمامة kimāma pl. -āt, كمائم kamā’im  muzzle; cloth for muffling the mouth; mask; O gas mask; perianth, calyx
كمء kam’ pl. اكمؤ akmu’ truffle; mushroom
كمأة kam’a (pl.) truffles
كما ka-mā see ك ka
كمان kamān violin, fiddle
(q.v.) كمنجة a of player kamānjī كمانجي
 كمب (Engl.) kamb camp
كمبيالة (It. cambiale) kambiyāla pl. -āt bill of exchange, draft
كمبريت kambarīt batiste, cambric
كمبيو (It. cambio) kambiyō exchange, money exchange; rate of exchange
كمت kamata u (kamt) to suppress (ھ one’s anger)
كميت kumait (m. and f.) reddish-brown, chestnut, bay, maroon
كمثرى kummatrā (coll.; n. un. كمثراة kummatrāh
pl. كمثريات kummatrayāt) pear
كمح kamaḥa a (kamḥ) to pull up, rein in (ھ an animal) IV do.
 كمخ kamaka a (kamk) with بانفه bi-anfihī to turn up one’s nose, be haughty IV = I
كماخ kumāk pride, haughtiness, overweening, self-conceit
 كامخ kāmak, kāmik pl. كوامخ kawāmik  vinegar sauce, pickle; (mixed) pickles
 كمخا kamkā silk fabric, damask
كمد kamida a (kamd) to be sad, grieved, distressed, heartsick; to be smutty, swarthy, dull, flat (color); to fade, lose color, become discolored II to apply a hot compress, a hot pack (ھ to a limb) IV to sadden, grieve, worry, make heartsick (ه s.o.) X to become smutty, swarthy, dull, flat; to darken, become dark (color) 839
كمد kamd, kamad and كمدة kumda dull, swarthy color; dullness, duskiness, swarthiness; sadness, grief
كمد kamid and كميد kamld aad, grieved. worried. heartaick; gloomy. dark
كمد kimād and كمادة kimāda compress, pack
اكمد akmad  dark-colored, blackish, swarthy
تكميد takmīd application of hot compresses, fomentation
كامد kāmid sad, grieved, worried, heartsick; gloomy, dark; swarthy, dark- colored
مكمد mukammad and مكمدة mukammada
pl. -āt compress, pack
 كمر kamar pl. اكمار akmār belt
كمرة kamara pl. -āt beam, girder, specif., iron girder; arm, jib │ حمالة كمرة (ḥammāla) and الونش قضبان تحميل كمرة (quḍbān al-winš) beam, bridge (of a traveling crane)
 مكمور makmūr (eg.) dish of chopped meat and vegetables
كمرك (syr.) gumrug pl. كمارك gamārig 
customs; customhouse
كمركي gumrugī customs-, tariff- (in compounds)
كمساري kumsārī pl. كمسارية kumsārīya (eg.) (streetcar, railroad, etc.) conductor
كمش kamaša u (kamš) to seize, grasp, grip, clutch (ھ s.th.) V to become wrinkled, to wrinkle; to shrink; to contract; to recoil within o.s. cower, quail VII to become wrinkled, to wrinkle; to shrink; to contract; to tighten, become cramped, be convulsed; to recoil within o.s., cower, quail; to withdraw within o.s., become or be preoccupied with o.s. be self-absorbed; to collect one’s thoughts, gather one’s strength, concentrate (also with نفسه على)
كمشة kamša a handful
كمش kamiš, كميش kamīš adroit, skillful, skilled │ اإلزار كميش k. al-izār do.; efficient, active, diligent, industrious
كماشة kammāša pl. -āt (pair) of pincers
انكماش inkimāš absorption, preoccupation, self-absorption
منكمش munkamiš shrunk; cramped, clenched, convulsed; absorbed, preoccupied, self-absorbed, introverted
كمع III to sleep (ه with s.o.), embrace (ه s.o.), have sexual intercourse (ه with s.o.)
كميع kamī’ bedfellow
كمل kamala, kamula u and kamila a (كمال kamāl, كمول kumūl) to be or become whole, entire, integral, perfect, complete; to be finished, done, completed, accomplished; to be concluded, come to a close II and IV to finish, wind up, conclude, complete, consummate (ھ s.th.); to carry out, execute (ھ s.th.); to perfect, round out, complement, supplement (ھ
 s.th.) VI and VIII to be perfect, consummate, integral, be or become complete, finished, done, accomplished, concluded; to reach completion, fulfillment or perfection, to mature, ripen; to be perfected X to complete (ھ s.th.); to perfect (ھ s.th.); to round out, complement, supplement (. s.th.); to carry out, meet, fulfill (ھ s.th., e.g., conditions)
كمال kamāl pl. -āt perfection; completeness; completion, consummation, conclusion, termination, windup; maturity, ripeness │ بكماله in its full scope, completely, entirely, wholly, totally
كمالي kamālī luxury, luxurious, de luxe;
كماليات luxuries; luxury
كمالة kamāla (colloq.) that which fills up or completes a weight or number, a complement; addition, supplement 840
اكمل akmal   more complete, more perfect │ باكمله entirely, wholly, totally; باكملھا لندن all London
تكميل takmīl completion, complementing, perfecting, perfection; conclusion, termination, windup; consummation, execution
تكميلي takmīlī completing, complementing, complementary, supplementary │ تكميلي انتخاب by-election
تكملة takmila supplement, complement
اكمال ikmāl completion, complementing, perfecting, perfection; conclusion, termination; windup; consummation, execution
تكامل takāmul integration; unification to a perfect whole │ O التكامل حساب integral calculus
تكاملي takāmulī integrative; all- including and unifying to form a perfect whole
اكتمال iktimāl completion; maturity, ripeness
استكمال istikmāl conclusion, termination, finishing
كامل kāmil pl. كملة kamala perfect, consummate; genuine, sterling; complete, full, plenary, full-strength; completed, concluded; whole, entire, total, integral;
name of a poetic meter; folio format (paper) │ بكامله wholly, entirely, totally, altogether, in its entirety; O كامل لبن (laban) unskimmed, full-bodied milk
متكامل mutakāmil perfect; integrative; complete, integral
كمن kamana u and kamina a (كمون kumūn) to hide; to be hidden, concealed, latent; to have its secret seat (في in); to ambush, waylay (ل s.o.) V to lie in wait (ل for s.o.), ambush, waylay (ل s.o.) X to hide, lie concealed
كمنة kumna black cataract (med.)
كمان look up alphabetically
كمون kammūn cumin (Cuminum cyminum L.; bot.) │ اسود كمون black caraway, black cumin (Nigella sativa L.; bot.); بري كمون (barrī) do.; حلو كمون (ḥulw) anise, aniseed
كمين kamīn pl. كمناء kumanā’  hidden, lying in ambush; ambush, secret attack │ كمينا دبر (dabbara) to hatch a plot; له نصب كمينا to set a trap for s.o.
مكمن makman pl. مكامن makāmin  place whore s.th. is hidden; ambuscade;
ھنا مكمن السر │ place hiding ambush,
hunā m. as-sirr that’s where the secret lies
كامن kāmin hidden, concealed, latent; secret; pl. كوامن kawāmin  underlying factors, hidden background, latent depths
كمنجا kamanjā and كمنجة kamanja oriental stringed instrument having one or two strings; (Western) violin, fiddle
كمه kamah blindness (from birth)
كمه pl. kamhā’ , كمھاء f. akmah , اكمه
kumh blind, born blind
كمي kamīy pl. كماة kumāh, اكماء akmā’ armed and ironclad, in full armor; brave, valiant, courageous
كميون (Fr. camion) kamiyōn pl. -āt truck, lorry
كن kanna u (kann, كنون kunūn) to hide (ھ s.th.); to conceal, cover, cloak (ھ s.th.); to shelter, ensconce, contain (ھ s.th.); to harbor (ھ ل friendship toward); to calm down, subside, abate (wind) II to hide, conceal, secrete, keep secret (ھ s.th.); to calm, quiet, still, assuage (ھ s.th.) IV to
 hide, conceal, secrete, keep secret (ھ s.th.) VIII to be hidden, be concealed X to be hidden, be concealed; to seek shelter; to lie comfortably, nestle, cuddle, snuggle; to calm down 841
كن kann, kinn pl. اكنان aknān, اكنة akinna place where one is sheltered; cover, shelter, retreat, refuge; nest; home, house, hut; arbor, bower
كنة kanna pl. كنائن kanā’in  daughter-in- law; sister-in-law
كنة kinna shelter, cover, covering
كنة kunna pl. -āt, كنان kinān shed roof, pent roof, awning
كنان kinān pl. -āt akinna shed roof, pent roof, awning
كنانة kināna pl. كنائن kanā’in  quiver (for arrows) │ كنانة ارض arḍ kināna, الكنانة Egypt (land of the Kinana tribe)
stove kawānīn  كوانين pl. kānūn كانون
كانون kānūn: األول كانون k. al-awwal December (Syr., Leb., Jord., Ir.); كانون الثاني k. at-tānī January (Syr., Leb., Jord., Ir.)
كنين kanīn hidden, concealed; well-kept
مكنون maknūn hidden, concealed; well- kept; hidden content
 كنار kanār edge, rim, border, fringe, hem, selvage
 كناري kanārī canary
 كنب kanab callocity, callus
كنب kanib and مكنب muknib callous (skin)
 كنبه or كنبيه (Fr. canapé) kanabēh pl. -āt sofa
الكنج al-kunj the Congo
كنجرو kangarū kangaroo (eg.)
 كنود kunūd ingratitude
كنود kanūd ungrateful
 كندا kanadā Canada
كندي kanadī Canadian
 كندر kundur frankincense
 كندرة kundura pl. كنادر kanādir  (syr.) (Western-style) shoe
كندش kunduš magpie
كنار look up alphabetically
كنز kanaza i (kanz) to bury (األرض في in the ground, ھ a treasure); to pile up, heap up, lay up, accumulate, amass, collect, gather, save, hoard (ھ s.th.) VIII to be firm, compact, sturdy, strapping; to accumulate, amass, gather (ھ money, treasures); to hide (ھ money, treasures)
كنز kanz pl. كنوز kunūz treasure
كنز kaniz firm, compact (flesh); sturdy, strapping (body)
اكتناز iktināz strong, sturdy build, sturdiness, compactness, stoutness (of the body)
مكتنز muktaniz firm, compact (flesh); sturdy (body); compressed, pinched (lips); massive, strong; -- muktanaz accumulated, amassed; hidden, buried
كنس kanasa u (kans) to sweep (ھ the house) II do.
كنس kans sweeping, cleaning
الكنسة al-kansa visit of the ulema to the tomb of the Imam al-Shāfi‘ī where they sweep away the dust
كناس kannās sweeper; street sweeper, street cleaner
كناسة kunāsa sweepings, refuse, garbage, offal
كنيس kanīs nose bag
كنيس kanīs synagogue
كنيسة kanīsa pl. كنائس kanā’is  church (Chr.); synagogue, temple (Jud.)
kanā’isī كنائسي and kanasī كنسي
ecclesiastic(al); clerical 842
مكنسة miknasa pl. مكانس makānis  broom; O sweeper, street sweeper (machine) │ كھربائية مكنسة (kahrabā’īya) vacuum cleaner
مكناس miknās , مكناسة miknāsa  Meknes (city in N Morocco)
كناشات scrapbook; kunnāša كناشة kunnāš, كناش
fundamentals, principles
كنصول (Fr. console) kunṣōl pl. -āt console
كنعان kan‘ān Canaan
 كنغر kangar kangaroo
كنف kanafa u (kanf) to guard, protect (ه s.o.); to fence in, hedge, provide with an enclosure (ھ s.th.); to surround (ھ s.th., ه s.o.); to help, assist (ه s.o.) III and IV to shelter, protect, help, assist (ه s.o.) VIII to surround (on both sides), enclose, embrace (ھ s.th.)
كنف kanaf pl. اكناف aknāf side, flank; wing; shadow, shelter, pale, fold; bosom
│ كنف في under cover of ..., in an atmosphere of ...; اكنافه في under his protection, under his sponsorship
كنافة kunāfa pl. -āt vermicelli baked in sugar, melted butter and honey
كنيف kanīf pl. كنف kunuf water closet, toilet; public lavatory
مكتنف muktanaf surrounded, enclosed (
ب by)
كنفاش (Engl.) kanfāš canvas
كنكة kanaka (= تنكة eg.) pl. -āt coffee pot
  كنكن kankana to stay at home; to settle down, make o.s. at home; to nestle, snuggle, cuddle up
  كنكينا kanakīnā quinine
كنه VIII to fathom, probe, sound, investigate, explore (ھ s.th.), look (ھ into
s.th.); to get to the bottom (ھ of s.th.); to understand thoroughly, grasp in its entirety (ھ s.th.) X to seek to explore or find out (ھ s.th.); to fathom, discover, find out, grasp, understand (ھ s.th.)
كنه kunh utmost degree, extreme; core, essence, substance, true nature, essential being │ المعرفة كنه يعرفه ya‘rifuhū kunha l- ma‘rifa he understands it most thoroughly, he grasps its very essence
تكھنات = takannuhāt تكنھات
istiknāh استكناه and iktināh اكتناه
fathoming, penetration, exploration
كنھور kanahwar cumuli
كنو) and كني) كنا kanā u and كنى kanā i (كناية kināya) to use metonymically ( عن ب s.th. for); to allude (ب عن with s.th. to); -- كنى kanā i (كنية kunya) and II to call (ه s.o.) by the surname of (ب) V and VIII to be
known by the surname of (ب), call o.s. by the surname of (ب)
كنية kunya pl. كنى kunan surname, agnomen (consisting of abū or umm followed by the name of the son)
كناية kināya indirect expression, metonymy; allusion; indirect declaration of (legal) intent (Isl. Law) │ بالكناية indirect, not clear and unequivocal (as opposed to عن كناية ھو ؛(صريح it is tantamount to ..., it means ..., it stands for ..., it consists in ...; عن كناية kināyatan ‘an tantamount to; in lieu of, instead of
عنه مكني maknīy ‘anhu metonymically expressed
مكنى mukannan surnamed
كھرب kahraba to electrify, electrize (ھ s.th.); to ionize (ھ s.th.) II takahraba to be electrified, be electrized, become electric; to be charged with electricity; to be ionized
كھربة kahraba electrization, electrification; electricity 843
kahārib  كھارب pl. kahrab كھرب
electron
كھيرب kuhairib pl. -āt electron
كھيربي kuhairibī electronic, electron- (in compounds) │ الكھيربي المجھر (mijhar) electron microscope
كھاربي kahāribī electronic, electron- (in compounds)
كھرباء kahrabā’ and كھربا kahrabā amber; electricity; الكھرباء (eg.) the street- car, the trolley
kahrabī كھربي and kahrabā’ī كھربائي تيار كھربائي │ electrician electric(al); جامعة كھربائية current; electric (ṭayyār) battery, secondary battery, storage (miṣbāḥ) مصباح كھربائي accumulator; عالج كھربائي lightbulb; lamp, electric electrophysicist; عالم كھربائي diathermy; electromagnet; (magnaṭīs) مغنطيس كھربائي نور electromagnetism; مغنطيسية كھربائية light electric (nūr) كھربائي
كھربية and kahrabā’īya كھربائية
kahrabīya electricity
 مكھرب mukahrab electrically charged, electrized, electrified; O electrically conductive, conducting, ionized; O electrically ignited, provided with electric ignition
كھرطيسي kahraṭīsī electromagnetic
كھرمان kahramān amber
كھف kahf pl. كھوف kuhūf cave, cavern; depression, hollow, cavity │ رئوي كھف (ri’awī) pulmonary abscess, vomica (med.); الكھف اصحاب the Seven Sleepers
كھل kahala a (كھول kuhūl), kahula u (كھولة kuhūla) and VIII to be middle-aged, be at the height of one’s life
كھل kahl pl. كھل kuhhal, كھال kihāl, كھول kuhūl, كھالن kuhlān middle-aged, man of mature age
كھل kuhūla maturity of age
كاھل kāhil pl. كواھل kawāhil  upper part of the back; withers │ كاھله ثقل taqqala kāhilahū to load, burden, encumber s.o. or s.th., e.g., الميزان كاھل ثقل (k. al-mīzān) to burden the budget; كاھله عن العبء تخفيف (t. al-‘ib’) unburdening, disencumbrance of
s.o. or s.th.
كھامة kahāma dullness, bluntness; lassitude languor, weakness
 كھن kahana a u (كھانة kahāna) to predict the future, tell the fortune (ل of s.o.), prophesy (ل to s.o.) V to predict, foretell, presage, prophesy (ب s.th.)
كھانة kahāna prediction; prophecy
كھانة kihāna divination, soothsaying, fortunetelling
كھنوت kahnūt, kahanūt priesthood │ الكھنوت رجال the clergy, the ministry
كھنوتي kahanūtī priestly, sacerdotal, ministerial, clerical, ecclesiastic(al)
مكھن makhan (place of an) oracle
تكھن takahhun pl. -āt prediction, prophecy; conjecture, surmise
كاھن kāhin pl. كھان kuhhān, كھنة kahana diviner, soothsayer, prognosticator, fortuneteller; priest الكھنة رئيس and كبير الكھنة high priest
متكھن mutakahhin diviner, soothsayer, prognosticator, fortuneteller
 كھنة kuhna rags, shreds, scrap, junk; ragged, tattered
كھنجي kuhnajī ragman, rag picker
كھاية kihāya administrative district in Tunisia
كاھية kāhiya pl. كواه kawāhin chief officer of a كھاية; deputy, vice-, under-, sub- (Tun.)
كوة kūwa pl. -āt, كوى kuwan, كواء kiwā’ aperture; small window, attic window, skylight; peephole 844
كواليني kawālīnī pl. -ya locksmith
كوب kūb pl. اكواب akwāb drinking glass, tumbler, (ir.) cup
كوبة kūba drinking glass, tumbler; hearts (in a deck of cards)
كوبرته (It. coperta) kūbarta deck (of a ship)
كوبري (Turk. köprü) kūbrī pl. □ كباري kabārī
bridge (eg.)
كوبنھاج (Fr. Copenhague) Copenhagen
كوبنھاجن kōbinhāgin Copenhagen
كوبيا (It. copia) kōbiyā copy │ كوبيا قلم qalam k. copying pencil, indelible pencil
كوبيل (Engl. cobble) cobbled pavement, cobblestones
كوبيه (It. copia) kōbiya copy
الكويت al-kuwait Kuwait
كوتر (Engl. cutter) kōtar pl. كواتر kawātir  (eg.) cutter, yawl
كوثة kauta fertility; abundance, profusion
كوثر kautar much, ample, abundant, plentiful, large quantity; الكوثر al-kautar name of a river in Paradise
كوثل kautal stern (of a ship)
كوى   see مكوجي
hut akwāk اكواخ pl. kūk كوخ  
  كاخية look up alphabetically
  كود) كاد) kāda (1  pers. perf. kidtu) imperf. يكاد yakādu to be on the point (ان of doing s.th.), be about (ان to do s.th.), (with imperf.) it wouldn’t have taken much more ..., he (it) all but ..., he (would have)
 almost ... │ يموت كاد he almost died; كدت اذھب kidtu adhabu I almost went; يكون يكاد العدم حكم في (ḥukmi l-’adam) it is almost as good as nonexistent; (with neg. corresponding to Engl. “hardly, scarcely, barely; no sooner ..., as soon as ...”:) كاد ما يقوم no sooner had he got up ...; ترى تكاد ال (tarā) you will hardly ever see, or, you barely see, or, the moment you see …; لم يراھا يكد lam yakad yarāhā no sooner had he seen her, the moment he saw her; يكد لم حتى – and حتى -- كاد ما no sooner – than, as soon as he -- he ..., the moment he – he …
كاد kād: بالكاد almost, nearly; see also alphabetically
  كود II to heap up, pile up (ھ s.th.)
كودة kauda pl. اكواد akwād heap, pile
  زار كودية (eg.) kudyit zār woman leader of the Zar ritual
  كور II to roll, roll up, coil, roll into a ball (ھ s.th.), to wind (ھ the turban); to make round, ball-shaped (ھ s.th.); to clench ( قبضته qabḍatahū one’s list) V to become round, be or become ball-shaped, globular, spherical, to curl up (in a lying position); to conglomerate, form or gather into a ball
كور kūr pl. اكوار akwār, اكور akwur, كيران kīrān camel saddle; forge, furnace, smelting furnace, bellows
كورة kūra pl. كور kuwar district, rural district, small town, village, ball (= كرة)
كورى see below, alphabetically
كوارة kuwāra pl. كوائر kawā’ir  beehive
كوروي kūrawī ball-shaped, globular, spherical
مكور mikwar and مكورة mikwara turban
مكور mukawwar ball-shaped, globular, round
  كار look up alphabetically
بالكورجة bi-l-kauraja in the bulk, wholesale, in the lump
كوردون (Fr. cordon) kordōn pl. -āt cordon; ribbon, braid, lace, trimming 845
كورس (Engl.) kōras chorus (also fig.); choir
كورسيھات pl. korsēh corset) (Fr. كورسيه
korsēhāt corset
كوريك كورك، (Turk. kürek) kūrēk forced labor (eg.)
كرنيش see corniche) (Fr. كورنيش Korea kōriyā كورريا
كوري kōrī Korean
كورك and كريك see كوريك
كوز kūz pl. اكواز akwāz, كيزان kīzān small jug of clay or tin; mug, tankard │ الذرة كوز k. ad- dura (eg.) corncob
  كوس kūs pl. -āt small drum
كأس = akwās اكواس pl. kās كاس  
  كويس kuwayyis (eg.) nice, fine, pretty, comely, handsome, beautiful
اكوس akwas  more beautiful, prettier, nicer
كوسا or كوسى kūsā (coll.; n. un. كوساة kūsāh, □ كوساية kūsāya) (eg., syr.) zucchini; see also under كيس
كوسج kausaj swordfish (Xiphias gladius)
كوشة kūša pl. كوش kuwaš kiln (specif., limekiln)
كوع kū’ and كاع kā’ pl. اكواع akwā’, كيعان kī’ān projecting carpal end of the radius, wristbone; elbow (anat.); kū’ elbow, angle, bend (of a pipe); curve, turn, bend (of a road) │ الماسورة كوع kneepiece or elbow of a pipe; البوع من الكوع يعرف ال (ya’rifu) he doesn’t know his knee from his elbow (proverbially of a stupid person)
كوف V to band together, throng together, gather in a crowd
الكوفة al-kūfa Kufa (town in Iraq)
الكوفيون writing; Kufic Kufic; kūfī كوفي
the Kufic (school of) grammarians
كوفية kūfīya pl. -āt kaffiyeh, square kerchief diagonally folded and worn under the ‘iqāl as a headdress
كوك (Engl.) kōk coke
كوكب kaukab pl. كواكب kawākib  star (also, fig., of screen, stage, etc.); leucoma, white opacity in the cornea of the eye │ كوكب سينمائي (sīnamā’ī) film star
 كوكبة kaukaba star; group, troop, party; (pl. كواكب kawākib ) (Syr.; mil.) squadron (of armored units, of cavalry)
كوكبي kaukabī star-shaped, stelliform, starlike, stellular, stellate, stellar; starry, starred; astral
كوكتيل koktēl cocktail
كوالن kaulān, kūlān papyrus (Cyperus papyrus;
bot.)
كولومبو kolombō Colombo (capital of Ceylon)
كولومبيا kolombiyā Colombia
كولونيا kolōniyā Cologne; Eau de Cologne
كوليرا (Fr. choléra) kōlīrā cholera
كوليس kūlīs pl. كواليس kawālīs  side scene, coulisse, backdrop │ الكواليس وراء behind the scene, backstage (also fig.)
كوالين pl. of كالون, which see (alphabetically);
ibid. كواليني
كوم II to heap, pile up, stack up (ھ s.th.) V to be piled up; to pile up; to accumulate; to sink to the ground, crumple, collapse in a heap
كوم kaum pl. اكوام akwām, كيمان kīmān heap, pile; hill; pl. كيمان kīmān esp. garbage piles, refuse dump
كومة kauma, kūma pl. -āt, كوم kuwam,
كومة الحطب │ mass pile; heap, akwām اكوام
k. al-ḥaṭab pyre, stake
كوماندان kom6ndan commBndant, commander 846
كمساري see كومساري
كومسيوجي kūmisyōjī commission merchant
كومودينو (It. coomidino) komudīnū bedside table
كوميديا kōmīdiyā comedy
 كون) كان) kāna u (kaun, كيان kiyān, كينونة kainīna) to be; to exist; to happen, occur, take place; with acc. of the predicate: to be s.th.; with foll. perf. denoting the pluperfect; with foll. imperf. expressing duration in the past = Engl. progressive past: was doing (often corresponding to Engl. “used to ...”, “would ...”); with ل: to belong to, be one’s own (بيت له كان he had or owned a house); with ل and s.th.: to be
the right man for, be qualified for; with من: to belong to, pertain to; with على: to be incumbent on, be the duty of; with الى: to be assigned to, be the lot or share of, be left to, be due (s.o.) │ يكون ما foll. the elative: يكون ما اتم على (atammi) in the moat perfect manner conceivable, as perfect(ly) as possible; الصواب الى تكون ما اقرب اقوالھم (ṣawāb) what they said came quite close to the truth: ل يكن لم (lam yakun) or ل كان ما (with foll. subjunctive) he is (or was) not the right man for, he was not capable of, he was not in a position to ...; it is (or was) not apt to ...; ان عليه ليصعب يكن لم (li- yaṣ’uba) it wouldn’t have been difficult for him to …, there was no reason why he couldn’t have ...; ان اال منه كان ما (or يكن لم) (illā an) he had no other choice but to ..., there was nothing for him to do but to ...; he did no more than ...; ان له كان ما it is (or was) impossible for him to ...; he is (or was) unable to ...; كان خبر في اصبح aṣbaḥa fī kabari k. to disappear, become dated, belong to the past; وكان كان a popular form of poem consisting of quatrains II to make, create, produce, originate, bring forth, bring into being, form, shape, fashion (ھ s.th.) V to be created, be formed; to come into existence, form, arise, develop; to consist, be composed, be made up (من of), be formed (من by) X to become lowly, humble, miserable; to submit, yield, surrender, humble o.s., abase o.s., eat humble pie; to abandon o.s., give o.s. over (الى to s.th.)
كون kaun pl. اكوان akwān being, esse; existence; event, occurrence, incident; الكون the existent, the existing, reality; the world; the cosmos, the universe │ الكون األعلى (a‘lā) the Supreme Being, God; with foll. genit. or suffix of the logical subject and acc. of the predicate: the fact that s.o. or s.th. is ..., مجنونا لكونه li-kaunihī majnūnan because he is mad, مجنونا كونه مع although he is mad
كوني kaunī of or relating to the universe or cosmos, universal, cosmic, cosmo- (in compounds) │ O الكونية األشعة (aši‘‘a) cosmic rays; كوني نظام cosmic system
كيان kiyān being, esse; existence; essence, substance; nature
اليكون al-yakūn the sum total
 مكان makān pl. امكنة amkina, اماكن amākin  place where one is or stands; place, site, spot, location; passage (in a book); locality, locale; seat, place (e.g., in a railroad compartment); position, standing, rank, dignity; importance, consequence, weight; space (philos.); presence; situation, conditions, circumstances; مكان makāna in the place of, in lieu of, instead of │ مكانك كنت لو lau kuntu makānaka if I were in your place, if I were you; مكانه makānahū on the spot, at once; مكانك makānak stop! مكان كل في everywhere; مكانا اخلى (aklā) to make room; مكينا مكانا احتل (ihtalla) to have or hold a strong, powerful position; من ھو بمكان الشجاعة (šajā‘a) he is 847 extremely brave; بمكان األھمية من ذلك (ahammīyah) that is of considerable importance; النظرية ھاته بمكان الضعف من (naẓarīya, ḍu‘f) this theory is rather weak; نفسه من الشيء مكان (nafsihī) the importance of s.th. for s.o., the place that s.th. has in s.o.’s mind; الحديث مكان site of action, scene of the crime, locus delicti; المكان ظرف ẓarf al-m. adverb of place (gram.); وعرة اماكن (wa‘ra) difficult terrain, rugged country
مكانة makāna pl. -āt place; location, situation; position, office; standing, authority, influence, rank, dignity │ مكانة الصدر m. aṣ-ṣadr first place, precedence, priority
مكاني makānī local
مكانية makānīya spatiality (philos.)
تكوين takwīn forming, shaping, formation, creation, origination; (pl. تكاوين takāwīn ) formation (of rock; geol.) │ التكوين جميل well-shaped, shapely; سفر التكوين sifr at-t. the Genesis
تكون takawwun genesis, birth, nascency, origin, incipience, rise, development; formation
استكانة istikāna yielding, submission, resignation, passivity
كائن kā’in being; existing, existent; situated, located; a being, entity, creature, creation; (pl. -āt) thing; s.th. existing, an existent │ المطلق الكائن (muṭlaq) the Absolute Being, God; الكائنات the created things, the universe, the world; كان من كائنا
(man) whoever it may be; كان ما كائنا be it what it may, whatever it may be
مكون mukawwin creator; -- mukawwan made, created; consisting, composed, made up (من of), formed (من by)
مستكين mustakīn humiliated, oppressed, resigned, submissive
 كيوان look up alphabetically
كونتراتو (It. contratto) kontrātō agreement, accord, treaty, contract
كونكرداتو (It. concordato) konkurdātō settlement, composition (between debtor and creditors)
كونياك konyāk cognac
كوى  see مكوى for مكوه □
 كوى kawā i (كي kayy) to burn (ھ s.th.); to sear (ھ s.th.); to cauterize, treat with a cautery (ه s.o.; med.); to brand (ه s.o.); to bite, burn (acid); to sting (scorpion); to press, iron ( ھ laundry, and the like) VIII to be burned, be seared; to be cauterized; to be pressed, be ironed; to burn o.s., burn one’s skin
كي kayy burning; cauterization, cautery; pressing, ironing │ الكي حجر ḥajar al-k. lunar caustic, silver nitrate; O الكھربائي الكي (kahrabā’ī) diathermy
كية kayya a burn, a brand
كواء kawwā’ slanderer, calumniator; ironer, presser
كواية kawwāya ironing woman, ironer
كوية kawīya (syr.) press, crease (in trousers)
مكواة mikwāh and مكوى makwan pl. مكاو makāwin flatiron; hot iron (for cauterizing), cautery (med.) │ الشعر مكواة
m. aš-ša‘r curling iron
مكوى makwan ironing establishment
□ مكوجي makwajī ironer, presser; laundryman
كاو kāwin caustic
كوة see kuwan كوى 
 كي kai, لكي li-kai so that, in order that, in order to │ ال كي and ال لكي in order not to, lest 848
 كيما kai-mā, لكيما li-kai-mā that, so that, in order that, in order to
  كي kayy and كية kayya see   كوى   كيت kīt Indian dress material
  وكيت كيت kaita wa-kaita, kaiti wa-kaiti so and so, such and such, thus and thus
  كيد) كاد) kāda i (kaid, مكيدة makīda) to deceive, dupe, outwit (ه s.o.); to harm by artful machinations (ل s.o., s.th.), lay snares (ل for s.o.), plot s.o.’s (ل) downfall, conspire (ل against s.o.) III to deceive, dupe, outwit (ه s.o.); to seek to double-cross (ه s.o.)
كيد kaid pl. كياد kiyād ruse, artifice, stratagem; craftiness, slyness, cunning, subtlety; deception, deceit; artful plot; trick, dodge
مكيدة makīda pl. مكايد makāyid  ruse, artifice, trick; smart action, clever approach, shrewd policy; stratagem; plot, conspiracy, machinations, schemes, intrigues
  كاد look up alphabetically
bellows kīrān كيران akyār, اكيار pl. kīr كير
كيروسين (Engl.) kirūsīn kerosene
كيس) كاس) kāsa i (kais, كياسة kiyāsa) to be smart, clever, intelligent; to be nice, fine, pretty, comely, handsome, attractive, chic II to refine, make elegant
كيس kais smartness, cleverness, intelligence; subtlety, finesse, gracefulness, elegance
كيس kais m. and f., pl. اكياس akyās, كيسة kiyasa, sack; bag; pouch; purse; Turkish towel │ الوسادة كيس pillowcase, pillow slip; الصفراء كيس k. aṣ-ṣafrā’ gall, bile; كيسه على at his expense
kaisā, كيسى akyās, اكياس pl. kayyis كيس
f. كيسة kayyisa, pl. كياس kiyās sly, smart, astute, shrewd, sagacious; adroit, dexterous, skillful; nice, fine, elegant, stylish, chic, attractive, comely, pretty, handsome
كياسة kiyāsa adroitness, dexterity, skill; cleverness, smartness, astuteness, shrewdness, slyness, sagacity, subtlety, finesse; courtesy, civility, politeness;
gracefulness, grace; elegance, chic, stylishness
اكيس akyas , f. كيسى kīsā and كوسى kūsā, pl. كيس kīs smarter, slier; more skillful; more stylish, more chic, nicer
مكيساتي □ and mukayyis مكيس
mukayyisātī (eg.) bath attendant, masseur
مكيس mukayyas shrewd, subtle, astute, smart, sly
كيف II to form, shape, fashion, mold (ھ s.th.); to fit, condition, modify, conform, adjust, adapt (ھ s.th., نفسه o.s.); to regulate (ھ s.th.); to put in high spirits, exhilarate, amuse, delight (ھ s.o.); to intoxicate slightly, dope, stupefy (ه s.o.; of a narcotic) Y to be shaped, be formed; to assume a form, take on a shape; to adapt o.s., adjust o.s., conform; to be in high spirits, be cheerful, gay; to amuse o.s., enjoy o.s., have a good time, have fun; to revel; to be slightly intoxicated, be tipsy, fuddled; to smoke (tobacco, etc.)
كيف kaifa (interrogative and exclamatory particle) how? how ...! │ كيف حالك (ḥāluka) how are you? و ال كيف ... why shouldn’t it be so since ...! ب فكيف just imagine how much more (or less) ...! and how much more ...! and how much less
…!
كيفما kaifamā however, howsoever │ الحال كان كيفما whatever the case may be, be that as it may; in any case, at any rate
كيف kaif state, condition; mood, humor, state of mind, frame of mind; pleasure, delight, well-being, good humor, 849 high spirits; discretion, option. will; (pl. كيوف kuyūf) narcotic, opiate │ كيفك على at your discretion, as you please; as you wish, as you like; الكيف اصحاب bons vivants, epicures
كيفي kaifī arbitrary, discretionary, optional; qualitative
كيفية kaifīya manner, mode, fashion; property, quality; nature, state, condition; particulars, particular circumstances (e.g., of an event) │ العمل كيفية k. al-‘amal operation (e.g., of a machine); كيفية االستعمال directions for use
 تكييف takyīf forming, shaping, fashioning; formation; a.daptation, adjustment, conditioning, modification; regulation; descriptive designation, qualification; air conditioning, = تكييف الھواء t. al-hawā’
تكيف takayyuf adaptation, adjustment, conformity
مكيفة mukayyifa, الھواء مكيفة m. al-hawā’ pl. -āt air-conditioning installation, air conditioner
مكيفات mukayyifāt narcotics, opiates
 كيكة kaika pl. كياكي kayākī egg
 كيكة kīka, كيكا kīkā (eg.) hide-and-seek
كيل) كال) kāla i (kail, مكال makāl, مكيل makīl) to measure (ھ s.th.); to weigh (ھ s.th.); to compare by measuring (ھ ب s.th. with), measure s.th. (ھ) by the standard of (ب); to measure out, mete out, allot, apportion ( ھ ل s.th. to s.o.) │ الشتائم له كال to heap abuse on s.o.; اللطمات له كال (laṭamāt) to give s.o. a beating, spank, thrash s.o. II to measure (ھ s.th.) III to return like for like, repay in kind (ه to s.o.)
كيل kail pl. اكيال akyāl measure; dry measure for grain; holding capacity
كيلة kaila pl. -āt kilah, a dry measure (Eg. = 16.72 l; Pal. = 361)
كيلي kailī and مكيل makīl (volumetrically) measurable, volumetric(al)
كيال kayyāl corn measurer; one who metes out, who determines the right measure, muter, lord
مكيل and makāyīl  مكاييل pl. mikyāl مكيال makāyil  مكايل pl. mikyala مكيلة mikyal, الموازين │ grain for measure dry measure; measures and weights the والمكاييل
كيلو kīlō and كيلوجرام kilogrām pl. -āt kilogram
كيلوسيكل (Fr. kilocycle) kīlōsikl pl. -āt kilocycle (radio)
كيلومتر kīlōmitr pl. -āt kilometer
كيلوواط kīlōwāṭ kilowatt
كالون = كيلون look up alphabetically
كي  see kai-mā كيما
كيموس kaimūs gastric juice
الكيمياء │ alchemy chemistry; kīmiyā’ كيمياء كيمياء التربة biochemistry; (aḥyā’īya) االحيائية
k. at-turba agricultural chemistry
كيمي kīmī chemical
kīmāwī كيماوي kīmiyā’ī, كيميائي
chemical; -- (pl. -ūn) chemist; alchemist;
كيماويات kīmāwīyāt chemicals
(كان (كين kāna i (kain) to humble o.s., abase o.s., eat humble pie, submit, resign o.s. X do.
al-k. kašab خشب الكينا │ quinine kīnā كينا
cinchona, china bark, Peruvian bark
كينين kīnīn quinine
كيھك kiyahk, kīhak the fourth month of the Coptic year
كيوان kaiwān the planet Saturn
كيوبيد (Engl.) kiyūbīd Cupid 850



ﻝ
 ل la (intensifying particle) truly, verily; certainly, surely; frequently after ان inna, introducing the predicate: الدعاء لسميع ربي ان inna rabbī la-samī’ d-du’ā’ truly, my Lord hears the prayer; also as a correlative of لو lau and لوال lau-lā: لكان ھذا تفعل كنت لو انفع (la-kāna anfa’a) if you did this it would be more useful; لھلك تاب لوال lau-lā tāba la-halaka if he had not repented he would have perished; (particle of oath) لعمرك la-’amruka by your life!
 ل li 1. (prep.) for; on behalf of, in favor of; to (of the dative); because of; for the sake of; due to, owing to; for, for the purpose of; at the time of, when, as; by (designating the author or originator); occasionally substituting for الى; as to ل paraphrasing the genit. and acc. see grammar │ مال عليه لي he owes me money; علبه وما له ما his right and his duty; his credit and his debit, his assets and his liabilities; ان له he has a right to ..., he is entitled to ..., he may ...; it is possible for him to ..., he is able to ..., he can ...; لي ليس
 ان I have no right to ... , it does not behoove me to ...; ھذا لك or ذلك لك you can have that! it’s up to you; it’s all right with me! all right! O.K.! agreed! في لك ھل or الك في would you like ...? do you want ...? do you feel like ...? كتابا له قرأت I read a book by him, I read one of his books; له تدوم ال حال (tadūmu) no state is of any permanence with him, he is never the same for a very long timeلمعاونتنا قاموا (li- mu’āwanatinā) they set out in our support; شعبان من خلون ليال لسبع li-sab’i layālin kalauna min ša’bāna when seven nights of Shaban had passed; األولى للمرة li-l- marrati l-ūlā for the first time; وھلة ألول li- awwali wahlatin at first sight, at once; اخوه وأمه ألبيه li-abīhi wa-ummihī his brother on the paternal and maternal side, his
brother-german, his full brother 2. (conj. with the subjunctive) that, so that, in order that, in order to; (with apoc.) expressing an order. an invitation: ليكتب li-yaktub he shall write, let him write (with preceding و wa or ف fa contracted to wal- ... or fal ... with elision of the i)
ألجل li-ajli (with foll. genit.) because of, on account of, for
ألن li-an (conj. with the subjunctive) that, so that, in order that, in order to; (with لئال (ال li-allā in order not to, lest
ألن li-anna (conj.) on the grounds that; because; for
لذلك li-dālika therefore, hence, that is why, for that reason
لكي li-kai and لكيما li-kai-mā (conj. with the subjunctive) that, so that, in order that, in order to
لما li-mā (shortened لم li-mā) why? wherefore? for what reason? لماذا li-mā-dā why (on earth)?
لھذا li-hādā therefore, hence, that is why, for that reason
ال lā (particle) not, no! with apoc. expressing negative imperative: تقل ال lā taqul don’t say! with indef. acc. expressing a general negation; there is not, there is no ..., e.g., ال ﷲ اال اله lā ilāha illa llāh there is no god but Allah; فيه خير ال (kaira) there is no good in it, it’s no good; منه بد ال (budda) there is no escape from it, it is inevitable;
جرم ال lā jarama certainly, surely; شك ال ١٥٨ lā šakka no doubt, doubtless; سيما ال lā siyyamā especially. particularly; اال a-lā see بال أ؛ bi-lā without; وال wa-lā (with preceding neg.) nor, ... either; not even, also وال حتى ḥattā wa-lā, e.g., حتى يعطني لم قرشا وال (lam yu‘ṭinī, qiršan) he did not give me even a piaster, he did not give me as much as a piaster; وال – ال neither -- nor
ابالية ال lā-ubālīya indifferent attitude, indifference
أدرية ال lā-adrīya skepticism; agnosticism
أنا الال al-lā-anā the nonego (philos.)
أنانية ال lā-anānīya selflessness, unselfishness
جنسية ال lā-jinsīya statelessness, being without nationality
ديني ال lā-dīnī antireligious, irreligious, without religion
دينية ال lā-dīnīya irreligion, godlessness
سامي ال lā-sāmī anti-Semitic; anti-
Semite
سامية ال lā-sāmīya anti-Semitism
سلكي ال lā-silkī wireless, radio (adj.); radio, broadcasting; radio message │ اشارة سلكية ال (išāra) radio message
الالشعور al-lā-šu‘ūr the unconscious, unconscious mind, unconsciousness
الشعوري lā-šu‘ūrī unconscious, unaware شيء ال lā-šai’ nothing, nonentity, nil شيئية ال lā-šai’īya nonexistence,
nothingness; nullity, nihility
المباالة lā-mubālāh and المبالية lā- mubālīya indifferent attitude, indifference
المركزية lā-markazīya decentralization المسؤولية lā-mas’ūlīya irresponsibility نظام ال lā-niẓām lack of system,
confusion
الالنھاية al-lā-nihāya the infinite
النھائي lā-nihā’ī infinite
الالتين al-lātīn the (ancient) Latins
التيني lātīnī Latin │ الالتيني الحي (ḥayy) the “Quartier latin” (in Paris)
 الالتينية al-lātīnīya the Latin language,
Latin
الدن lādan, lādin laudanum
الزورد lāzuward, lāzaward lapis lazuli; azure
الزوردي lāzuwardī azure-blue, azure, sky-blue, cerulean
الزوردية lāzuwardīya azure, blue of the sky
السيه (Fr. lacet) lāsēh lace, cord
  ألكIV to send as a messenger (ه الى s.o. to) مألك mal’ak and ملك malak pl. مالئك malā’ik , مالئكة malā’ika angel; messenger, envoy
مالئكي malā’ikī angelic(al); heavenly
 الئكي look up alphabetically
الكن lākin, lākinna however, yet, but
ألأل la’la’a (ألألة la’la’a) to shine, flash, glitter, glisten, sparkle, gleam, shimmer, glimmer, beam, radiate; to wag (بذنبه bi- danabihī the tail) II tala’la’a to shine, glitter, glisten, sparkle, gleam, shimmer, glimmer, beam, radiate
ألألة la’la’a shine, glow, brightness, brilliancy, radiance, flash, glitter, twinkle
ألالء la’lā’ glitter, flash; light, glow, gleam; perfect joy, unruffled gaiety; dealer in pearls
لؤلؤ lu’lu’ (coll.; n. un. ة) pl.: آللي la’ālī  pearls │ اللؤلؤ زھر zahr al-l. daisy; عرق اللؤلؤ ‘irq al-l. mother-of-pearl, nacre
لؤلؤى lu’lu’ī pearly; pearl-colored, whitish │ لؤلؤي شعير pearl barley 852
تأللؤ tala’lu’ shining, radiance, brilliancy
متأللئ mutala’li’ shimmering, glistening, glittering, flashing, sparkling
ألم la’ama a (la’m) to dress, bandage (ھ a wound); to repair, mend (ھ s.th.); to solder, weld; -- لؤم la’uma (lu’m, آلمة la’āma, مألمة mal’ama) to be ignoble, lowly (of character and birth); to be base, mean, vile, evil, wicked III to agree (ه with s.o.); to suit, fit (garment; ه s.o.); to be adequate, appropriate (ھ to s.th.), be suitable, fit, proper, convenient, favorable, propitious (ھ for s.th.); to be adapted (ھ
to), be in harmony (ھ with), match (ھ s.th.); to agree (climate, food; ه with s.o.), be wholesome (climate, air, food; ه for s.o.); to bring about a reconciliation, make peace (بين between), reconcile (و – بين s.o. with); to make consistent or congruous, reconcile, harmonize, bring into harmony (بين different things) IV to act ignobly, behave shabbily VI to be mended, be repaired, be corrected; to go well (مع with); to act meanly VIII to be mended, be repaired, be corrected; to be joined, be connected, be patched up, be soldered, be welded; to match, fit together, harmonize, be in harmony, agree, go together, be congruous, conformable, consistent; to be tuned or geared to each other (fig.); to unite, combine; to cohere, stick together; to heal, close (wound); to gather, assemble, convene (persons); to meet (committee, congress, council, etc.)
ألم la’m dressing, bandaging (of a wound); joining, junction, connection; repair
لؤم lu’m ignoble mind, baseness, meanness, vileness, wickedness; niggardliness, miserliness; sordidness; iniquity
لئم li’m peace; concord, agreement, union, unity, unanimity; conformity, consistency, harmony
ألمة la’ma cuirass, pair of cuirasses
لئيم la’īm pl. لئام li’ām, لؤماء lu’amā’, لؤمان lu’mān, ignoble, lowly, low, base, mean, evil, vile, wicked, depraved; sordid, filthy, dirty; niggardly, miserly
مالءمة mulā’ama adequacy, appropriateness, properness, suitability, fitness; peacemaking, (re)conciliation; concord, union, agreement, harmony
مالئم mulā’im adapted, suited, appropriate (ل to), suitable, fit, proper, convenient, favorable, propitious (ل for); agreeing, harmonizing, in conformity, consistent (ل with)
الم lām name of the letter ل
المي lāmī lām-shaped, resembling the letter ل
الما lāmā llama (zool.)
 النش (Engl.) lanš pl. -āt launch, motorboat, small steamer
الھاي lāhāy The Hague (city in SW Netherlands)
الھوت lāhūt godhead, deity; divine nature, divinity │ الالھوت علم ‘ilm al-l. theology
الھوتي lāhūtī theological; theologian
الالھوتية al-lāhūtīya theology الھور lāhūr  Lahore (city in W Pakistan) ألواء la’wā’   severe distress, hardship
ألي la’y slowness, tardiness; tediousness, tiresomeness │ ألي بعد after great difficulties, in the end, finally, after all
الئكي (from Fr. laïque) lā’ikī layman; secular, laic, lay
الئكية lā’ikīya laicism 853
لب labba u (labb) to remain, abide, stay (ب in a place); -- (1  pers. perf. labibtu) a (لبب labab) and (1  pers. perf. labubtu) u ( لبابة labāba) to be sensible, reasonable, intelligent II to kernel, ripen into kernels, produce kernels (grain, nuts) V to gird o.s. prepare o.s. (ل for)
لب lubb pl. لبوب lubūb kernels, core (of fruits); the innermost, marrow, pith; core, gist, essence; prime, best part; -- (pl. الباب albāb) heart; mind, intellect, reason, understanding
لبة labba pl. -āt upper part of the chest; throat of an animal, spot where its throat is slit in slaughtering
لبة libba (eg.) golden necklace
لبب labab pl. الباب albāb upper part of the chest; throat of an animal, spot where its throat is slit in slaughtering; breast collar (of a horse’s harness); martingale
لباب lubāb marrow, pith, core, quintessence, gist, prime, beet part │ لباب الخشب l. kašab cellulose
لبيب labīb pl. الباء alibbā’ understanding, reasonable, sensible, intelligent
تلبيب talbīb pl. تالبيب talābīb  collar │ بتالبيبه اخذ to collar s.o., seize s.o. by the collar
لبؤة labu’a pl. -āt lioness
لبتة labta carp (zool.)
لبث labita a (labt, lubt, labat, لباث lubāt) to hesitate, tarry, linger; to abide, remain, stay (ب in a place); (with imperf.) to persist in an activity, keep doing s.th. │ ما حتى) أن (يلبث لم) لبث) it did not take long before he …, presently he ..., he lost no time in …; يفعله لبث he did it for a while V to hesitate, tarry, linger; to abide, remain, stay
لبث labt, lubt, labat hesitation, tarrying, delay; stay, sojourn
لبثة lubta short delay, brief respite; pause; temporary stay or stop, stopover
لبخ labk, labak (coll.; n. un. ة) a variety of acacia (Mimosa lebbec L.), also lebbek tree (Albizzia lebbek Bth.; bot.)
لبخة labka pl. labakāt cataplasm, poultice; soft mass, mush; emollient plaster, emollient
لبيخ labīk fleshy, corpulent
لبد labada u (لبد lubūd) to stick, adhere, cling ( ب to s.th.), get stuck (ب on); to abide, remain, stay (ب in a place) II to cause to adhere and mat together, to felt, mat (ھ wool); to line with felt (ھ s.th.); to beat down, weigh down (ھ s.th., e.g., the hail
-- grass); to full (ھ s.th.) IV to cling firmly, adhere, stick (ب to s.th.) V do.; to stick together; to become felted, matted, entangled, interwoven; to be compressed; to become clouded; to become overcast ( بالغيوم with clouds; sky); to become gloomy (face)
│ felt albād الباد lubūd, لبود pl. libd لبد clouds of masses thick لبود من الغمائم
لبد labad wool
لبد labid coherent; compact
لبد lubad the seventh vulture of Luqmān (whose death ended Luqmān’s life; metaphor of longevity)
لبدة libda pl. لبد libad mane (of a lion); (eg.) skullcap of felt, worn under or without a tarboosh; felt hat (of the dervishes)
لبدة lubda pl. لبد lubad matted and pressed wool or hair, felt
 لباد labbād feltmaker; felt
لبادة lubbāda pl. -āt horse blanket, saddle blanket; -- (pl. لبابيد labābīd  ) felt cap 854
ملبد mulabbad: بالغيوم ملبد (bi-l-guyūm) overcast, heavily clouded (sky)
متلبد mutalabbid: بالغيوم متلبد overcast, heavily clouded (sky)
لبس labisa a (lubs) to put on, wear (ھ a dress, garment); to dress (ھ in), clothe o.s. garb
o.s. (ھ in or with) II to dress (ه ھ s.o. in), clothe, garb, attire (ه ھ s.o. with); to cover, envelop, overlay, coat (ھ ب s.th. with. layer); to drape, line, face, case (ھ ب s.th. with); to inlay (e.g., wood with ivory); to suffuse (ه s.o., e.g., pallor), seize (ه s.o., e.g., so tremor); to make obscure, unclear, abstruse, involved, complicated (ھ على s.th. for s.o.); to deceive, dupe (على s.o.) III to be on intimate terms, associate closely, hobnob (ه with s.o.); to be in close contact (ه ھ، with s.o., with s.th.); to surround (ه s.o.; environment, milieu, conditions) IV to dress (ه ھ s.o. in), clothe, garb, attire (ه ھ s.o. with); to drape, envelop, coat, overlay, cover, face, line, case (ھ s.th.) V to dress, get dressed (ب in), clothe o.s. (ب in or with); to be dressed, clad, attired; to be covered (ب with), be enveloped, wrapped (ب in); to get involved (ب in s.th.), be drown (ب into s.th.); to meddle, bother (ب with), go into s.th. (ب); to be obscure, incomprehensible, dubious, equivocal, ambiguous (على for s.o.) VIII to be obscure, dubious, equivocal, ambiguous (على for s.o.); to get mixed up (ب with); to mistake (ھ s.th., ب for)
لبس labs, lubs and لبسة lubsa tangle, muddle, confusion, intricacy, obscurity, uncertainty, abstruseness, ambiguity │ كان امره من لبس في to be uncertain about s.o.; to have doubts about s.o.
لبس libs pl. لبوس lubūs clothes, clothing, dress, apparel; costume
لبسة libsa manner or style of dressing, costume
لباس libās pl. -āl, البسة albisa clothes, clothing; costume; apparel; garment, robe, dress; (eg., syr.) (men’s) drawers │ لباس
الرأس l. ar-ra’s headdress, headgear; لباس التقوى l. at-taqwā decency, modesty; لباس رسمي (rasmī) and عسكري لباس (‘askarī) uniform; السھرة لباس l. as-sahra evening gown, evening clothes, formal dress; لباس وطني (waṭanī) national costume; جاھزة البسة ready-made clothes
لبيس labīs worn; worn clothes, secondhand clothes; Nile carp (Cyprinus niloticus: zool.)
لبوس labūs clothing, clothes; suppository (med.) │ رسمي لبوس (rasmī) uniform
ملبس malbas pl. مالبس malābis  garment, dress, robe, apparel, suit; pl. also: clothing, clothes, costume │ O الوقاية ملبس protective clothes; التشريفة مالبس dress uniform; وخارجية داخلية مالبس (dākilīya wa- kārijīya) underwear and outer clothes; رسمية مالبس (rasmīya) livery, uniform; O الميدان مالبس m. al-maidān field uniform; المالبس محل maḥall al-m. ready-made- clothes store
تلبيس talbīs clothing, dressing, garbing; draping, lining, facing, casing; overlaying, coating; wall facing, wall plaster, paneling; inlay work; deception, deceit, fraud
تلبيسة talbīsa suppository (med.)
مالبسة mulābasa intercourse, intimate association, close relations; مالبسات relations, connections; concomitants, accompanying phenomena; surrounding conditions, environment
الباس ilbās clothing, dressing, garbing
تلبس talabbus: التلبس قضايا qaḍāyā t-t. (jur.) cases of “flagrante delicto”, criminal cases in which the perpetrator was caught in the act
التباس iltibās confusion, tangle, intricacy, obscurity, ambiguity, dubiousness, 855 doubt │ االلتباس رفع raf‘ al-ilt. correction, rectification, clarification; االلتباس به احاط (aḥāṭa) to be wrapped in obscurity, be completely ambiguous
ملبوس malbūs worn, used (clothes); (eg.) possessed, in a state of frenzy or
 religious ecstasy; pl. ملبوسات articles of clothing, clothes
ملبس mulabbas involved, intricate, obscure, dubious; inlaid, coated, incrusted; sugar-coated, candied; (pl. -āt) bonbon, candy; dragée
متلبس mutalabbis: بالجريمة متلبسا (he was caught, and the like) redhanded, in the act, flagrante delicto
ملتبس multabis involved, intricate, ambiguous, equivocal; dubious, doubtful, uncertain, unclear
throw to (arḍ) لبط به األرض (labṭ): II labaṭa لبط
s.o. to the ground, fell s.o.; -- i to kick; to gallop about (animal)
لبق labaqa II (لباقة labāqa) to be clever, slick, adroit, skilled, skillful, versatile, suave, elegant, have refined manners; -- labiqa a (labaq) do.; to fit, suit, become (clothes; ب s.o.) II to fit, adapt, adjust (ھ s.th.)
لبق labaq cleverness, smartness, slyness, subtlety; skill, adroitness, slickness, ingenuity; seemliness, propriety, decency, decorum
لباقة labāqa cleverness, smartness, slyness, subtlety; skill, adroitness, slickness, ingenuity; seemliness, propriety, decency, decorum; elegance, refined manners, suavity, gracefulness
لبق labiq clever, smart, sly, subtle; slick, adroit, skilled, skillful, versatile; elegant, suave, of refined manners; fitting, proper, becoming, seemly
لبيق labīq clever, smart, sly, subtle; skillful, adroit; elegant, suave, refined
لبك labaka u (labk) and II to mix. Mingle, intermix (ھ s.th.); to confuse, mix up, muddle, jumble (ھ s.th.); -- labika a, V and VIII to get confused, be thrown into disorder, be disarranged, become disorganized
لبك labk and لبكة labka mixture; confusion, muddle, jumble
لبي see لبيك
لبلب lablaba to fondle, cares (ب her child; mother)
لبلب lablab, lublub affectionate, tender
لبالب lablāb English ivy (Hedera helix; bot.); (eg.) lablab, hyacynth bean (Dolichoe lablab; bot.)
labālīb  لباليب pl. (eg.) lablūb لبلوب
young shoot, sprout, vine
لبن II to make brick VIII to suck milk
لبن libn, labin (coll.) unburnt brick(s), adobes
لبنة labina (n. un.) pl. -āt brick, adobe
لبن laban pl. البان albān, لبان libān milk; (syr.) leban, coagulated sour milk; pl. البان dairy products, milk products │ الخض لبن
l. al-kaḍḍ buttermilk; اللبن شرش širš al-l. whey; O اللبن ميزان mīzān al-l. lactoscope; األلبان فرع far‘ al-a. dairy department
لبني labanī lactic, milk (adj.); milky, milklike, lacteous, lacteal
لبنية labanīya a dish prepared of milk
al-jīr l. لبنات الجير │ lactate labanāt لبنات
calcium lactate
لبان labān breast
لبان lubān frankincense, olibanum │ لبان جاوي (jāwī) benzoin; ذكر لبان dakar (eg.) olibanum, oriental frankincense (resin of Boswellia carteri; bot.); شامي لبان (eg.) a pitchy resin used as a depilatory 856 (resin of Pinus Brutia Ten.); العذراء لبان
al-‘adrā’ magnesia, Epsom salts, bitter salt
لبان libān sucking, nursing; (eg.) towline
لبان labbān brickmaker; milkman
لبانة lubāna pl. -āt, لبان lubān wish, desire, object, aim, goal, end; business, undertaking, enterprise
لبانة libāna selling or production of milk products, dairy
لبنة labina, لبون labūn, لبونة labūna pl. لبان libān, لبن lubn, lubun, لبائن labā’in milk, giving milk │ لبون حيوان (ḥayawān) mammal
لبنى lubnā storax tree
لبنان lubnān  Lebanon
لبناني lubnānī Lebanese (pl. -ūn) a Lebanese
 ملبن malban a sweet made of cornstarch, sugar, mastic and pistachios
ملبنة malbana dairy
لبوة labwa pl. labawāt lioness
لبى II to follow, obey (ھ a call, an invitation), respond, accede (ھ to), comply (ھ with a request), carry out (ھ an order) │ نداء لبى ربه (nidaā’a rabbihī) to be called away by the Lord, pass away
لبيك labbaika here I am! at your service!
تلبية talbiya following, obeying, observance, accedence, response, compliance │ ل تلبية (talbiyatan) in compliance with; لدعوته تلبية (li-da‘watihī) upon his invitation
لبيريا libēriyā Liberia
لت latta u (latt) to pound, bray, crush (ھ s.th.); to mix with water (ھ flour); to knead (ھ dough); to roll (ب s.th. in), coat (ھ ب s.th. with); (eg.) to prattle, chatter │ في وعجن لت مسألة (wa-‘ajana, mas’ala) not to tire of raising a problem anew, discuss a question back and forth
لت latt (eg.) idle talk, prattle
لتات lattāt (eg.) prattler, chatterbox, windbag
لتر litr pl. -āt liter
لتموس (Engl.) litmūs litmus
لتوانيا lituwāniyā Lithuania
التي allatī see الذي (alphabetically)
لثو see لثة
لثغ latiga a (latag) to pronounce defectively (esp. the lingual r), lisp (ث for لثغ │ (س بالسين (sīn) to lisp the s
لثغة lutga defective pronunciation, lisping
lutg لثغ pl. latgā’ , لثغاء f. altag , الثغ
having a speech defect, lisping
لثم latama i (latm) to kiss (ھ s.th.); to strike, hit, wound, injure (ھ s.th.) II to veil (ھ the face) with the li/dm (q.v.); to veil, cover ( ھ s.th.) V and VIII to veil one’s face; to cover o.s., wrap o.s. up, muffle o.s.
لثمة latma kiss
لثام litām veil (covering the lower part of the face to the eyes); cover, wrapping
ملثم mutallam and متلثم mutalattim veiled
لثة lita pl. -āt, لثى litan gums
لثوي litawī gingival, alveolar, of or pertaining to the gums │ اللثوية الحروف the interdental sounde ذ ث، and ظ; (phon.)
لج lajja (1  pers. perf. lajijtu) a and (1  pers. perf. lajajtu) i (لجج lajaj, لجاج lajāj, لجاجة lajāja) to be stubborn, obstinate, unyielding, relentless; to persist, persevere (في in); to insist (في on); to continue (في s.th.), keep doing s.th. (في); to importune, 857 pester, trouble, bother, inconvenience (على s.o.); to bear down (ب on s.o.), hit hard, wear out, weaken, exhaust (ب s.o., e.g., battle), torment, harass (ب s.o., e.g., hunger) III to argue or dispute obstinately (ه with s.o.) VIII to be noisy, uproarious, tumultuous; to roar, storm, rage
لج lujj and لجة lujja pl. لجج lujaj, لجاج lijāj depth of the sea; gulf, abyss, chum, depth
لجي lujjī fathomless, of tremendous depth (sea)
لجة lajja clamor, din, noise, hubbub
لجاجة lajāja stickling, disputatiousness; obstinacy, stubbornness; insistence, persistence
لجوج lajūj and الج lājj obstinate, stubborn, unyielding, relentless, insistent, troublesome, importunate, obtrusive, officious
لجأ laja’a a (لجء laj’, لجوء lujū’) and لجئ laji’a  a (لجأ laja’) to take refuge (الى in), resort, have recourse (الى to), fall back (الى on); to
seek information (الى from), refer (الى to) II to coerce, force, compel (ه الى s.o. to) IV do.; to shelter, protect, guard (ه s.o.); to entrust, commit (الى امره amrahū one’s cause, one’s affairs to) VIII to flee (الى to), take refuge (الى in), resort, have recourse ( الى to)
ملجأ malja’ pl. مالجئ malāji’  (place of) refuge, retreat; shelter; sanctuary, asylum; home; base; pillbox, bunker, dugout │ ملجأ األطفال day nursery, nursery school, children’s home; األيتام ملجأ orphanage; ملجأ الشيوخ home for the aged; العميان ملجأ m.
 al-‘umyān institution for the blind; ملجأ العجزة m. al-‘ajaza infirmary; O مضاد ملجأ الجوية للغارات (muḍādd, jawwīya) air-raid shelter
التجاء iltijā’ resorting, recourse (الى to), seeking refuge (الى in, with)
الجئ lāji’ one seeking refuge; refugee; emigrant; inmate of an asylum
ملتجئ multaji’ one seeking refuge, a refugee
لجب lajab noise, uproar, tumult; huge, boisterous army
لجب lajib uproarious, tumultuous, noisy, clamorous
لجلج lajlaja and II talajlaja to repeat words`in speaking; to stammer, stutter
لجلجة lajlaja stutter; stammering, stammer
لجالج lajlāj stutterer, stammerer
ملجلج mulajlaj constantly repeated, reiterated
لجم lajama u (lajm) to sew (ھ s.th.) II and IV to bridle, rein in (ھ a horse); to restrain, curb, hold down, silence (ه s.o.); to put the bridle (ه on s.o.) VIII to be bridled, be curbed, be tamed, be harnessed (e.g., energies)
lujum لجم aljima, الجمة pl. liillm لجام
bridle, rein
ملجوم maljūm and ملجم muljam bridled, curbed, harnessed
لجن lajina a (lajn) to cling, adhere, stick (ب to)
لجنة lajna pl. -āt, لجان lijān, لجن lijan board, council, commission, committee │ التحقيق لجنة investigating committee; لجنة ادارية (idārīya) administrative board, committee of management; االمتحان لجنة board of examiners, examination board; االنضباط لجنة disciplinary board; تنفيذية لجنة (tanfīdīya) executive committee; صلحية لجنة (ṣulḥīya) arbitration committee, board of arbitration; فرعية لجنة (far‘īya) subcommittee; مستديمة) قارة لجنة) (qārra, mustadīma) standing committee, 858 permanent committee; المراقبة لجنة l. al- mūrāqaba board of directors
لجين lujain silver
لجيني lujainī silvery
لح laḥḥa (laḥḥ) to be close (relationship) IV to implore, beseech, request with urgency; to insist (في on); to beسet, importune, pester, harass (على s.o.); to urge, press (ب or على في s.o. to do s.th.)
لحح laḥiḥ and الح close, narrow
لحوح laḥūḥ obstinate, stubborn, persistent
ملحاح milḥāḥ obstinate, stubborn, persistent; importunate, obtrusive
الحاح ilḥāḥ urging, pressing, urgency, insistence; emphasis; urgent solicitation, earnest request │ بإلحاح or إلحاح في insistently, earnestly, urgently
ملح muliḥḥ pressing, urgent; persistent; insistent, emphatic; importunate, obtrusive
الحب lāḥib open, passable (road); o electrode
لحج laḥaj  Lahej (sultanate and city in the Aden Protectorate)
لحد laḥada a (laḥd) to dig a grave; to bury, inter (ه s.o.); to deviate from the right course, digress from the straight path; to abandon one’s faith, apostatize, become a heretic; to lean, incline, tend (الى to) IV = I; VIII to deviate, digress; to abandon one’s faith, apostatize, become a heretic or unbeliever; to be inclined, lean, incline, tend (الى to)
لحد laḥd pl. لحود luḥūd, ألحاد alḥād grave, tomb; (ancient meaning: charnel vault with a niche for the corpse in the lateral wall)
لحاد laḥḥād gravedigger
إلحاد ilḥād apostasy; heterodoxy, heresy
إلحادي ilḥādī of or pertaining to godlessness
ملحد mulḥid heretical, unbelieving; -- (pl. -ūn, مالحدة malāḥida) apostate, renegade; heretic
لحس laḥasa a (laḥs) to eat away (ھ s.th., esp. a moth the wool), devour (ھ s.th.); -- laḥisa a (laḥs, لحسة laḥsa, luḥsa, ملحس malḥas) to lick (ھ s.th.); to lick up, lap up, lick out (ھ s.th.)
 ملحوس malḥūs licked; (eg.) imbecilic
لحظ laḥaẓa a (laḥẓ, لحظان laḥaẓān) to regard, view, eye (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), look (ه ھ، at); to notice, see, perceive, observe (ھ s.th., ان that) III to regard, view, eye (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), look (ه ھ، at); to see, behold (ه s.o.), catch light (ه of); to notice, perceive, observe (ان that, ھ s.th.); to remark, say, make the remark (ان that); to consider, bear in mind, observe, heed, take into consideration (ھ s.th.); to pay attention (ھ to); to supervise, superintend (ھ s.th.) │ شيئا عليه الحظ to observe or notice s.th. in s.o.; ان يالحظ مما mimmā yulāḥaẓu anna it will be noticed that ..., obviously ..., evidently ...
لحظ laḥẓ pl. الحاظ alḥāẓ look, glance
لحظة laḥẓa pl. laḥaẓāt (quick or casual) look, glance, glimpse; moment, instant │ الراھنة اللحظة the present moment, the immediate present; لحظة في in a moment, instantly; اللحظة ھذه في at that moment; لحظات laḥaẓātin for a few moments
لحظتئذ laḥẓata’idin at that moment
مالحظة mulāḥaẓa pl. -āt seeing, noticing, perception; observation; remark, comment, casual statement, note; observance, heed, notice, attention, consideration; supervision, superintendence, surveillance, control │ مالحظة ذو considerable, notable 859
الحظة lāḥẓa pl. لواحظ lawāḥiz  eye; look, glance
ملحوظ malḥūẓ noted, noteworthy, remarkable
ملحوظة malḥūẓa pl. -āt observation; remark; note
مالحظ mulāḥiẓ director, superintendent; overseer, supervisor, foreman
مالحظ mulāḥaẓ: ان والمالحظ obviously ..., evidently ...
لحف laḥafa a (laḥf) to cover, wrap (ه s.o.) IV do.; to request or demand urgently V and VIII to wrap o.s. (ب in), cover s.o. (ب with)
لحف liḥf foot of a mountain
الحفة (also luḥuf لحف pl. liḥāf لحاف
alḥifa) cover, blanket; bedcover,
counterpane, coverlet, quilt, comforter, wrap
مالحف pl. milḥafa ملحفة and milḥah ملحف
malāḥif  cover, blanket; wrap
الحاف ilḥāf importunity (of a petitioner)
ملتحف multaḥif wrapped (ب in), covered (ب with)
لحق laḥiqa a (laḥq, لحاق laḥaq) to catch up (ب or ه with s.o.), overtake (ب or s.o.), to reach (ب ھ، s.th.); to catch, make (ب ھ، e.g., a train), to touch (ب s.th.); to cling, adhere, attach o.s., stick, hang on, keep close (ب to s.o.), to join (ب s.o.), come along (ب with s.o.), to follow, succeed (ب s.o.), to unite (ب with); to betake o.s., go ( ب to), to enter (بمدرسة bi-madrasatin a school, بخدمة bi-kidmatin a service, لحق بخدمته to take up a position with s.o., enter the services of s.o.), to overcome, befall, affect, afflict (ه s.o.; disease, fear, loss, and the like), come, descend (ه upon s.o., calamity, etc.), to be incumbent (ه upon s.o.), be imperative (ه for) III to follow (ه s.o.); to go after s.o. (ه), trail, pursue, chase (ه s.o.) IV to attach, affix, join, subjoin, append, annex, add (ھ ب s.th. to). enclose (ھ ب s.th. in); to connect (ھ ب s.th. with); to increase, augment (ب ھ s.th. by), to take in all a member, admit (ه ب
s.o. to an organization, and the like), enroll (ه ب s.o. in), to inflict (ب ھ upon
s.o. or s.th. s.th.), cause (ب ھ s.o. or s.th. s.th., esp. damage); pass. ulḥiqa to be admitted (ب to an organization, a society, etc.), become a member (ب of), enter (ب a service) VI to follow in close succession; to pursue or chase each other, to blend into a continuous sequence, pass insensibly into each other VIII to reach (ب s.th. or s.o.); to catch up (ب with), overtake (ب s.th. or s.o.); to join (ب s.o.), go or come along (ب with), to enter (ب a service, a school, a university), join (ب an army, an organization, etc.), become a member (ب of), to matriculate (ب at a university), enroll (ب in a faculty), to take up (ب a position, a job), to be attached (ب to), be connected, be affiliated (ب with), to be attached, devoted, loyal │ التحقبالحكومة  to go into government service X to annex (ھ s.th.)
 لحق pl. الحاق alḥāq cultivable alluvial soil left behind by a flood
لحقي laḥaqī: لحقية مواد (mawādd) detritus (geol.), alluvium, alluvial residues
لحاق liḥāq accession (ب to), entry, entrance (ب to, into), joining (ب of), enrollment (ب in), membership (ب in)
مالحقة mulāḥaqa pl. -āt pursuit, chase; legal prosecution
الحاق ilḥāq joining, junction, subjunction, attachment, appending, affixation, affixture, addition, annexation; admission (ب to an organization, and the like), enrollment (ب in an association, and the like), political annexation
التحق iltiḥāq entering (ب of), entry, entrance (y to office. into a school. etc.), 860 joining (ب of), affiliation (ب with); accession (ب to)
استلحاق istilḥāq annexation; avowal of paternity (jur.)
الحق lāḥiq reaching; overtaking; subsequent, following; added, affixed, appended, subjoined, attached, joined, connected │ الحقا – سابقا sābiqan – lāḥiqan previously -- later on, at first -- subsequently
الحقة lāḥiqa pl. لواحق lawāḥiq  appendage, appurtenance, adjunct; pl. acceasories, appurtenances, adjuncts, dependencies
ملحق mulḥaq added, affixed, appended, attached, subjoined (ب to s.th.), enclosed ( ب in s.th.); adjoining, adjacent, contiguous; written or printed in the margin, marginal; appertaining, appurtenant, incident, pertinent, accompanying; incorporated, annexed; supplement; -- (pl. -āt, مالحق malāḥiq ) appendix; addition, addendum, postscript; supplement, extra sheet (of a newspaper, periodical, book); enclosure (in a letter); appendage; pendant, locket; tag, label; trailer (of a truck, etc.); annex, subsidiary building, wing or addition to a building; -- (pl. -ūn) attaché; assistant; pl. ملحقات also: annexed provinces, dependent territories, dependencies │ بحري ملحق (baḥrī) naval attaché; تجاري ملحق (tijārī) commercial
attaché; جوي ملحق (jawwī) air attaché; ملحق عسكري (‘askarī) or حربي ملحق (ḥarbī) military attaché; صحفي ملحق (ṣuḥufī) press attaché; فخري ملحق (fakrī) titular attaché
متالحق mutalāḥiq successive, consecutive, uninterrupted. continuous │ الحركة متالحق m. al-ḥaraka in continuous motion
لحم laḥama u (laḥm) to mend, patch, weld, solder (up) (ھ s.th.); -- laḥima a to get stuck II to solder (ھ s.th.) VI to join in battle, engage in a mutual massacre; to cling together, cleave together, stick together, hang together, cohere; to hold firmly together; to be joined, united VIII to adhere, cleave, stick (ب to); to be in immediate contact (ب with); to cling (ب to), fit closely (ب s.th.); to grapple, fight, struggle (in a clinch or in close combat); to cling together, cleave together, cohere; to stick together; to be interjoined, intermesh, be closely united; to close, heal up, sear over, cicatrize (wound)
لحم laḥm pl. لحوم luḥūm, لحام liḥām flesh; meat │ وشحمه بلحمه (šaḥmihī) in his real human form; ودما لحما (daman) dyed in the wool, inveterate
لحمة laḥma (n. un.) a piece of flesh or meat
لحمة laḥma, luḥma pl. لحم luḥam woof, weft (of a fabric); decisive factor, motif; luḥma relationship, kinship
لحمية laḥmīya conjunctiva
لحم laḥm fleshy, corpulent; carnivorous
لحام liḥām pl. -āt soldering; welding; soldered seam, soldered joint; solder
لحام laḥḥām butcher; solderer; welder
لحيم laḥīm fleshy
لحامة laḥāma fleshiness, corpulence
ملحمة malḥama pl. مالحم malāḥim  bloody fight, slaughter, massacre, fierce battle
ملحمي شعر ši‘r malḥamī heroic poem
التحام iltiḥām close union; cohesion; conjunction, union, connection, coherence; adhesion (phys.); grapple, struggle, fight, close combat
 ملتحمة multaḥima conjunctiva
لحن laḥana a (laḥn, لحون luḥūn, لحانة laḥāna) to speak ungrammatical Arabic (interspersed with barbarisms); -- laḥina a 861 to be intelligent II to chant, psalmodize; to intone, strike up a melody; to set to music, compose (ھ s.th.)
لحن laḥn pl. الحان alḥān, لحون luḥūn air, tune, melody; grammatical mistake, solecism, barbarism
لحن laḥin intelligent, understanding, sensible
تلحين talḥīn pl. تالحين talāḥīn  musical composition, musical arrangement
تلحيني talḥīnī singable
ملحون malḥūn incorrect, ungrammatical (language); (magr.) poetry in colloquial language
ملحن mulaḥḥin composer
(لحو and لحا (لحي laḥā (laḥw) and لحى laḥā a (laḥy) to insult, abuse, revile (ه s.o.) VI to call each other names, heap abuses on each other VIII to grow a beard
لحو laḥw and لحي laḥy insult, abuse, invective, vilification, defamation
الح pl. laḥyān, لحيان dual: laḥy, لحي
alḥin, لحي luḥīiy jawbone
لحية liḥya pl. لحى luḥan, liḥan beard, whiskers (on cheeks and chin), full beard
│ لحيته اطلق aṭlaqa liḥyatahū to let one’s beard grow; التيس لحية l. at-tais salsify (Tregopogon porrifolium; bot.)
لحية luḥayya  Luhaiya (town in NW Yemen, on Red Sea)
لحاء liḥā’ bast
الحى alḥā long-bearded
ملتح multaḥin bearded, having a beard, e.g., سوداء بلحية ماتح (bi-liḥya saudā’) a black-bearded man
لخص II to abridge (ھ s.th.); to summarize, sum up, epitomize, condense, compress (ھ s.th.); to excerpt (ھ s.th.), make an excerpt or extract (ھ of); to give the essence of s.th.; to sketch, outline (ھ s.th.); pass. يلخص yulakkaṣu it can he summed up (في ان to the effect that) V to he summarized,
be epitomized, be condensed, be summed up (في in), amount briefly (في to), be in its essence (في s.th.), narrow down (في to)
تلخيص talkīṣ abridgement; condensation; summary, resume; epitome, abstract, synopsis, outline; brier, abort report
ملخص mulakkaṣ abridged, excerpted, summarized, condensed; (pl. -āt) extract, excerpt, essence, gist
لخلخ laklaka to shake, shake off (ھ s.th.) II
talaklaka to shake, totter
ملخلخ mulaklak shaky, unsteady, tottering
لخمة lakama, lukama sluggish; gauche, awkward, clumsy
لخن lakan putrid stench
لخن alkan , f. لخناء laknā’ , pl. لخن lukn stinking; uncircumcized (as an abusive term)
ولد see lida لدة 
 اللد al-lidd Lydda (city and international airport in W Israel)
 لد ladda a (ladd) to dispute violently, have a fierce quarrel (ه with s.o.) II to defame, slander (ب s.o.); to bewilder, perplex, nonplus V to turn helplessly right and left, be bewildered, perplexed, confused; to be headstrong, recalcitrant
لدد ladad vehement quarrel, violent dispute
لدود ladūd, الد aladd , f. لداء laddā’ , pl. لد ludd, لداد lidād, الداء aliddā’  fierce, grim, dogged, tough │ الد عدو (‘adūw) mortal enemy, archenemy, foe; لدود عدو do.
متلدد mutaladdid obstinate, recalcitrant, headstrong, rebellious 862
لدغ ladaga u (ladg) to sting, bite (snake, s.o.); to taunt, hurt, offend (ه s.o.)
لدغة ladga sting; bite
ladgā لدغى ludagā’ , لدغاء pl. ladīg لديغ
stung; bitten
  لدن laduna u (لدانة ladāna, لدونة ludūna) to be soft, supple, pliant, flexible, resilient, elastic II to soften (ھ s.th.); to mollify,
 attenuate, temper, ease, mitigate, alleviate (ھ s.th.)
لدن ladn pl. لدن ludn, لدان lidān soft, gentle; pliant, pliable, flexible, supple, resilient, elastic; plastic
الدن lādan, lādin laudanum
لدانة ladāna and لدونة ludūna softness, pliability, flexibility, suppleness, plasticity, resilience, elasticity
لدائن ladā’in  plastics
  لدن ladun (prep.) at, by, near, close to; in the presence of, in front of, before, with; in possession of; لدن من from, on the part of; since; -- (conj.) since, from the moment when; ان لدن do.
لدني ladunī (i.e. ﷲ لدن من) mystic; العلم اللدني (‘ilm), اللدنية العلوم knowledge imparted directly by God through mystic intuition (in Sufism)
لدى ladā (prep.) at, by (place and time); in the presence of, in front of, before, with
│ الحاجة لدى in case of need, if necessary; لديه ladaihi he has; لديك ما the condition you are in, your state of mind; غيرما لدينا ليس ... (gairu) we know no more than what ...
لذ ladda (1  pers. perf. ladidtu) a (لذاذ ladad, لذاذة ladāda) to be sweet, delicious, delightful, pleasant, gratify the senses II and IV to please, gratify, delight (ه s.o.); to give pleasure (ه to s.o.) V and VIII to be pleased, delighted (ب at), delight, revel, take pleasure (ب in), be gratified (ب by); to find (ھ s.th.) delicious or pleasant, take delight (ھ in), enjoy, savor, relish (ھ s.th.) X to find delicious or pleasant (ھ s.th.); to find delightful (ھ s.th.); to take pleasure ( ھ in)
لذة ladda pl. -āt joy, rapture, bliss; pleasure, enjoyment, delectation, delight; sensual delight, lust, voluptuousness
لذيذ ladīd pl. لذ ludd, لذاذ lidād delicious, delightful; pleasant; beautiful, wonderful, splendid, magnificent; sweet
لذاذة ladāda pl. لذائذ ladā’id  sweetness; charm; bliss; rapture; enjoyment, delectation; pleasure, delight
ملذة maladda pl. -āt, مالذ malādd  joy, pleasure, amenity, comfort; delightfulness, enjoyment, delectation; voluptuousness
متلذذ mutaladdid epicure
لذع lada‘a a (lad‘) to burn (ھ s.th.); to brand, cauterize (ه s.o.); to hurt (with words), insult, offend (ه s.o.) V to burn
لذع lada‘ burning, combustion; conflagration, fire │ البنادق لذع rifle fire
لذاع laddā‘ burning; very hot, scorching; pungent, acrid, sharp; biting (words)
لوذع lauda‘ and لوذعي lauda‘ī sagacious, ingenious, witty, quick-witted, quick at repartee
لوذعية lauda‘īya sagacity, ingenuity, esprit, wit, quick-wittedness, mental alertness
الذع lādi‘ burning; pungent, acrid, biting; sharp
الذعة lādi‘a pl. لواذع lawādi‘  gibe, taunt
الالذقية al-lādiqīya Latakia, the ancient Laodicea (seaport in W Syria)
  لذي ladiya a (ladan) to adhere, cleave (ب to)
  الذي look up alphabetically 863
لز lazza (1  pers. perf. lazaztu) u (lazz, لزز lazaz, لززاز lizāz) to tie (ه ب s.th. to), connect or join firmly, unite (ه ب s.th. with), make (ھ s.th.) stick (ب to) II to connect or join firmly, press together (ھ s.th.); to cram together; to urge, press, coerce (ه الى s.o. to) VI to be crammed together; to lie close together V and VIII to be united, joined, connected (ب with); to adhere, cleave, stick (ب to)
لز lazz and لزة lazza U bolt, staple, cramp
ملزز mulazzaz crammed together; closely united; firm, solid, compact
لزب lazaba u (لزوب luzūb) to be firm, be firmly fixed, hold fast; to adhere, cleave, cling (ب to); to stick (ب to); -- laziba a (lazab) to cohere, cleave together, stick together
لزب lazib pl. لزاب lizāb little
لزبة lazba pl. لزب lizab misfortune, calamity
 الزب lāzib sticking, adhering, clinging; firm, firmly fixed │ الزب ضربة صار (ḍarbata l.) to become necessary, indispensable; الزب ضربة ضرب (ḍuriba) to meet with grave misfortune, be stricken by disaster
لزج lazija a (lazaj, لزوج luzūj) to be sticky, ropy, gluey, viscid; to stick, cling, get stuck (ب to)
لزج lazij sticky, gluey, ropy, viscid; adhesive
لزوجة luzūja stikiness, glueyness, ropiness, viscidity
لزق laziqa a (لزوق luzūq) to adhere, cling, cleave, stick, (ب to) II to affix, post (ھ s.th.); to stick on, paste on (ھ s.th.); to paste together (ھ s.th.); (eg.) to palm off, foist (ل ھ s.th. on s.o.) IV to Palte on, stick on, affix (ھ s.th.) VIII = I
لزق lizq adjoining, adjacent, contiguous
│ لزقه lizqahū or بلزقه close to his side, cose by
لزق laziq sticky, gluey
لزقة lazqa compress, stupe; plaster
لزاق lizāq adhesive, agglutinant, glue, cement, paste
لزوق lazūq and الزوق lāzūq compress, stupe; plaster, adhesive plaster, court plaster
لزم lazima a (لزوم luzūm) to cling, adhere, belong (ھ to), attend, accompany ( ھ s.th.); to persist, persevere (ھ in), stick, keep (ھ to), keep doing (ھ s.th.);to adhere, be attached, keep close, stick (ه to s.o.); to be inseparable (ه ھ، from s.o., from s.th.); to stay permanently (ھ in); to be necessary; to be requisite, imperative, indispensable (ه for s.o.); to be incumbent (ه upon s.o.), be s.o.’s (ه) duty │ داره لزم فراشة))  to stay at home (in bed); الصمت لزم (ṣamta) to keep went, maintain silence III to attend, accompany (ھ s.th.); to adhere, stick, keep (ھ to); to pursue or practice incessantly (ھ s.th.); to be constantly with
s.o. or in s.o.’s company (ه), be constantly around s.o. (ه) to be assigned (ه to), accompany, attend (ه s.o.); to be inseparable (ھ ه، from s.th., from s.o.); to keep doing (ھ s.th.), persist, persevere (ھ
in); to work with perseverance, display sustained activity (ھ for) IV to force, compel (ه ھ s.o. to); to force, press (ه ھ, also ه ب upon s.o. s.th.); to enjoin, impose as a duty (ه ھ, also ه ب on s.o. s.th.), obligate (ه ھ, also ه ب s.o. to or to do s.th.)
│ الحجة الزمه (ḥujja) to force proof on s.o., force s.o. to accept an argument; الزمه الفراش to confine s.o. to bed, compel s.o. to my in bed (of a disease); المال الزمه (or بالمال) to impose the payment of a sum on
s.o. VI to be attached or devoted to each other, be inseparable VIII to 864 adhere, stick, keep, hang on (ھ to); to keep doing (ھ s.th.), persist, persevere (ھ in), keep up, maintain preserve (ھ s.th.), abide (ھ by); to take upon o.s. (ھ s.th.); to make a rule (ھ of s.th.), make (ھ s.th.) one’s duty, impose upon o.s. (ھ s.th.); to assume as a duty (ب or ھ s.th.); to undertake, obligate o.s., bind o.s., pledge (ب or ھ to do s.th.); to be in duty bound, be obligated or under obligation, be or become liable (ب or ھ to do s.th.); to be forced, be compelled (ب or a to do s.th.); to be responsible (ب or ھ for); to take over the monopoly (ھ of s.th.), monopolize, farm (ھ e.g., the levying of tax..) X to deem necessary (ھ s.th.); to necessitate, make necessary or requisite (a s.th.); to require, need (ھ s.th.), call (ھ for), be in need (ھ of s.th.)
لزمة lazma pl. -āt official concessions, license, franchise
لزوم luzūm necessity, exigency, requirement; need, want │ اللزوم حسب ḥasaba l-l. as required, as the occasion demands; اللزوم عند in case of need, when (if) necessary, if need be; السفر لزوم بسكويت بالبحر (l. as-safar bi-l-baḥr) biscuit for the voyage
لزام lizām necessary, requisite; necessity, duty, obligation │ عليه لزاما كان ان to be s.o.’s duty to ..., be necessary for
s.o. that he ...
الزم alzam  more necessary, most necessary
ملزمة malzama pl. مالزم malāzim  section, signature (of a book, = 16 octavo sheets)
ملزمة milzama pl. مالزم malāzim  vise; press
 مالزمة mulāzama adhesion, clinging, sticking; remaining, staying, dwelling; close attachment; dependence; inseparableness, inherence, intrinsicality; following, pursuit, pursuance; perseverance, assiduity, zeal
الزام ilzām coercion, compulsion
الزامي ilzāmī forced, compulsory, obligatory, required
التزام iltizām pl. -āt necessity; duty, obligation, commitment, liability; engagement (philos. ); contract; farming of taxes, farmage; concession, license, franchise; monopoly; التزاما iltizāman by contract, by the job │ بالتزاماته قام to meet one’s obligations
الزم lāzim inherent, intrinsic, inseparable, indissoluble; necessary, requisite, imperative, indispensable, unavoidable, inevitable, inescapable; incumbent, binding, obligatory; intransitive (gram.); legally binding, irrevocable (Isl. Law) │ كاالزم as it must be, comme il faut, properly
الزمة lāzima fixed attribute, inherent property; standing phrase (of s.o.)
لوازم lawāzim  (pl.) necessary, inseparable attributes or manifestations; necessities, exigencies, requirements; necessaries, requisites; necessaries, fixtures
ملزوم malzūm obligated, under obligation, liable │ باألداء ملزوم (adā’) liable for taxes, taxable
ملزومية malzūmīya duty, obligation, commitment, liability
مالزم mulāzim tenacious (with foil. gen. it.: of), clinging, keeping, sticking (with foll. genit.: to); persevering, persisting, remaining, abiding; inseparable; closely connected, or attached; attending, accompanying; adhering; adherent, follower, partisan; second lieutenant (U.A.R., Tun.) │ اول مالزم (awwal; U.A.R., Leb., Jord., Ir.) first lieutenant; ثان مالزم (tānin; Leb., Jord., Ir., formerly also Eg., syr.) second lieutenant 865
ملتزم multazim engaged, committed, under obligation; holder of a concession
or monopoly; tax farmer; concessionaire, concessionary; contractor
ملتزم multazam pl. -āt requirement
مستلزمات mustalzamāt requirements, prerequisites, requisites; necessary or inevitable consequences
لستك lastik and لستيك lastīk rubber; eraser
لسع lasa‘a a (las‘) to sting (ه s.o.); to burn
(ھ s.th., e.g., the mouth); to hurt (with words; ه s.o.)
لسعة las‘a sting, bite; biting words
lusa‘ā’  لسعاء las‘ā, لسعى pl. lasī‘ لسيع
stung
السع lāsi‘ stinging; burning; biting, acrid, pungent, sharp
لسن lasina a (lasan) to be eloquent II to point, taper, sharpen (ھ s.th.)
لسن lasan eloquence
لسن lasin and السن alsan , f. لسناء lasnā’ , pl. السن alsun eloquent
لسان lisān m. and f. , pl. السنة alsina, السن alsun tongue; language; mouthpiece (fig.), organ (esp., of a newspaper; = الحال لسان  see below) │ لسان على from his mouth, through him; الصحف لسان على (l. iṣ-ṣuḥuf) through the organ of the press; لسانه على قيل ما (qīla) things were ascribed to him which
..., he was rumored to have said things which ...; رسمي لسان (rasmī) official organ; الخارجية وزارة بلسان متحدث (mutaḥaddit) a spokesman of the Foreign Ministry; باللسان or لسانا lisānan orally, verbally; السن على دار والعام الخاص (a. il-kāṣṣ wa-l-‘āmm) to be  the talk of the town, be on everyone’s lips; الثور لسان l. at-taur borage (Borago officinalis; bot.); الحال لسان the language which things themselves speak, silent language, mute expression (as distinguished from the spoken word); organ (of a party or political movement; a newspaper); يقول حاله ولسان while he seemed to say ..., with an expression as if he wanted to say ...; الحمل لسان l. al-ḥamal plantain (Plantago major L.; bot.); لسان العصفر l. al-‘uṣfur common ash (Fraxinus excelsior; bot.); القفل لسان l. al-qufl bolt of the lock; القوم لسان l. al-qaum spokesman (of a crowd); الكلب لسان l. al-kalb hound’s-
 tongue (Cynoglossum; bos.); (eg.) also a variety of scorpion’s tail (Scorpiurus muricatus L.; bot.), having circinately coiled pods; المفتاح لسان l. al-miftāḥ bit of the key; لسانين ذو dū lisanain double- tongued, deceitful, insincere, two-faced
لساني lisānī oral, verbal
ملسون malsūn liar
لشبونة lišbōna  Lisbon (capital of Portugal)
(لشى *; from lā šai’a:) III to suppress, crush, destroy, ruin, annihilate (. s.th.) VI to be suppressed, be crushed, be destroyed, be annihilated; to come to nothing, be ruined, be frustrated, fail; to disappear, vanish, dwindle, wane, fade
مالشاة mulāšāh annihilation, destruction
تالش talāšin annihilation, ruin, failure, frustration; disappearance, evanescence, vanishing, waning, decline
متالش mutalāšin coming to nothing, dwindling, waning; destructible; evanescent, transient, ephemeral
لص laṣṣa u (laṣṣ) to do stealthily or secretly (ھ s.th.); to rob, steal (ھ s.th.) V to become a thief; to act stealthily
alṣāṣ الصاص luṣūṣ, لصوص pl. liṣṣ لص
thief, robber
لصوصية luṣūṣīya thievery, theft, robbery
متلصص mutalaṣṣiṣ behaving like a thief, thievish │ الى متلصصا اتى (atā) to steal to, sneak up to 866
لصق laṣiqa a (laṣq, لصوق luṣūq) to adhere, cleave, cling, stick (ب to) II to paste together, stick together (ھ s.th.) III to adjoin (ھ s.th.), be next (ھ to s.th.), be contiguous (with), abut (ھ on), touch (ھ s.th.); to be in touch, in connection, in contact (ه with s.o.) IV to attach, affix, stick, paste, glue (ھ ب s.th. to); to connect (ھ ب s.th. with), join ( s.th. to); to bring (ھ s.th.) close (ب to); to press (ھ ب s.th. against) │ لوحة الصق (lauḥa) to post a placard; تھمة به الصق (tuhma) to raise an accusation against s.o. VI to cleave together, cling together, cohere, stick together; to agglomerate, conglomerate,
cake, frit together; to blend, pass into each other VIII = I; to hang on (ب to), get stuck (ب to, on); to fit closely (ب s.th.), cling (ب to)
لصق liṣq adhering, clinging, cleaving │ لصق close to him (or it); لصقي) بلصقي ھو) he and I are inseparable
لصق laṣiq sticky, gluey, glutinous; adhesive, agglutinant; tenacious
لصيق laṣīq one who cleaves or clings ( ب to); adjoining, adjacent, bordering, neighboring, abutting, contiguous; close- fitting, skintight (dress)
لصق laṣūq plaster
مالصقة mulāṣaqa junction, conjunction, connection, contact, union; adjacency, contiguity; O adhesion, cohesion (phys.)
الصاق ilṣāq poster, bill
تالصق talāṣuq and التصاق iltiṣāq cohesion, adhesion; contiguity, contact; coherence
مالصق mulāṣiq adjoining, adjacent, abutting, contiguous, bordering, neighboring, in close contact; companion; neighbor; adherent
ملصق mulṣaq attached, affixed; stuck on, pasted on, glued on; fastened; brought close; connected, joined; (pl. -āt) poster, bill, placard
متالصق mutalāṣiq cohering, sticking together; blending, passing into each other
ملتصق multaṣiq attached, affixed, adhesive, sticking; adjoining, adjacent, bordering, neighboring; contiguous, connected, meeting or touching each other, in contact; in the immediate proximity (ب of), close to (ب)
ملضوم malḍūm de (row), close (rank)
لطخ laṭaka a (laṭk) to stain, blot, sully, soil, spatter, splash (ھ ب s.th. with) II do. V to he soiled or stained
لطخة laṭka pl. laṭakāt smear, blotch, spot; stain, blemish, blot, disgrace
لطخة luṭaka pl. -āt and لطيخ liṭṭīk ass, dolt, fool
لطس laṭasa u (laṭs) to strike, hit (ه s.o.)
 ملطاس milṭās pl. مالطيس malāṭīs  pickax
لطش laṭaša u (laṭš) to strike, hit (ه s.o.)
لطع laṭa‘a a (laṭ‘) to strike, hit (ه s.o.); to strike out, erase (ھ s.th.)
لطعة laṭ‘a blot, stain
لطف laṭafa u (luṭf) to be kind and friendly (ب or ل to, toward s.o.); -- laṭufa u (لطافة laṭāfa) to be thin, fine, delicate, dainty; to be graceful; to be elegant; to be nice, amiable, friendly II to make mild, soft, gentle, soften (ھ s.th.); to mitigate, alleviate, ease, soothe, allay, palliate, assuage, extenuate (ھ s.th.; also من); to moderate, temper, lessen, diminish, reduce (ھ s.th.; also من); to tone down (ھ s.th.; also من) III to treat with kindness, with benevolence (ه s.o.); to be civil and polite (ه to, toward s.o.); to be complaisant, obliging, indulgent, compliant (ه toward s.o.), humor (ه s.o.); to flatter (ه s.o.), fawn (ه upon); to caress, fondle, pet (ه s.o.) │ ٧٦٨ كتفه على الطفه (katifihī) to pat s.o. on the shoulder
V to be mitigated, be tempered, be moderated; to be civil and polite, show
o.s. friendly and kind, be so kind as to do s.th. (ب); to bestow most kindly, have the kindness to give (ب s.th., also, e.g., advice. على to s.o.); to be tender, affectionate, nice (ب to s.o.); to win (ب s.o.) over by subtle means, by favors, by tricks; to go about s.th. (في or ب) gently, carefully, with caution; to do secretly, covertly, without being noticed (ب with verbal noun: s.th.) VI to show o.s. friendly and kind; to be polite, courteous, civil, nice X to find (ھ s.th.) pretty, sweet, nice; to like, find pleasant or charming (ھ s.th.)
لطف lutf pl. الطاف alṭāf kindness, benevolence, friendliness; gentleness, mildness; civility, courteousness, politeness; daintiness, cuteness, gracefulness; delicateness, delicate grace (e.g., of the limbs) │ بلطف gently, softly
لطافة laṭāfa thinness fineness, delicateness; gracefulness, loveliness, charm; kindness, benevolence; friendliness; politeness, esprit, intellectual refinement, sophistication; suavity, urbaneness
لطيف laṭīf pl. لطاف liṭāf, لطفاء luṭafā‘  thin; fine; delicate, dainty; little, small, insignificant; gentle, soft, light, mild; pleasant, agreeable; amiable, friendly, kind, nice; civil, courteous, polite; affable, genial; pretty, charming, lovely, graceful; intellectually refined, full of esprit, brilliant, witty; elegant; اللطيف the Kind (one of the attributes of God) │ لطيف يا O my God! good heavens! for goodness sake! اللطيف الجنس (jins) the fair sex
لطيفة laṭīfa pl. لطائف laṭā’if  witticism, quip; joke, jest; subtlety, nicety │ لطائف الحيل l. al-ḥiyal subtle tricks; النكات لطائف l. an-nukāt nice jokes
الطف alṭaf  finer; more delicate; kinder, nicer, more elegant
مالطفة mulāṭafa amiable treatment, amiability; civility, courteousness, politeness; friendliness; benevolence, kindness; caress; pl. -āt caresses
تلطف talaṭṭuf friendliness (ب toward s.o.), amiability; favoring, favoritism; civility, courteousness, politeness
ملطفات mulaṭṭafāt sedatives
لطم laṭama i (laṭm) to strike with the hand (ھ the face, with despair, in lamentation); to slap (ه s.o.); to jolt; to eject; to bump, strike (ھ against s.th.); to hit (ھ s.th.) VI to exchange blows, fight, brawl, battle (hostile armies); to collide, clash (waves) VIII to collide, clash
لطمة laṭma pl. laṭamāt blow; slap, box on the ear; jolt, thrust
لطيم laṭīm parentless
ملطم malṭam cheek
متلطم multaṭam clash (esp., of waves), tumult, turmoil (of a battle, and the like), melee
لظي laẓiya a (لظى laẓan) to burn brightly, flare, flame, blaze, be ablaze; to burn with rage V and VIII do.
لظى laẓan blazing fire, blaze, flame
لعب la‘aba and la‘iba a (la‘b) to slaver; to slobber, drool (baby); -- la‘iba a (lu‘b, li‘b, la‘ib, تلعاب tal‘āb) to play (ب with s.th.; على an instrument); to toy ( with); to dally (ب with); to trick, cheat, deceive,
 dupe (على s.o.) │ األوراق لعب (aurāqa) to play cards; دورا لعب (dauran) to play a part or role; الموسيقى لعب to make music; لعب بالشطرنج (šaṭranj) to play chess; به لعبت الھموم he became the sport of sorrows; لعب عقله في (‘aqlilhī) to turn s.o.’s head II to make (ھ s.th.) play, set (ھ s.th.) going; to wag (ھ the tail) III to play (ه with s.o.); to 888 have fun, play around, jest, dally, trifle (ه with s.o.) IV to make play, cause to play (ه s.o.) V to play, act playfully VI to play (ب with s.th.); to make fun (ب of s.o.), mock (ب at s.o.); to pull s.o.’s (ب) leg; to playa trick; to act fraudulently
لعب la‘b, li‘b, la‘ib pl. العاب al‘āb play; game, joke, jest; (un, amusement, diversion, pastime, sport │ القمار لعب gambling, gamble; االولمبية األلعاب the Olympic Games; رياضية ألعاب (riyāḍīya) athletics, sports; سحرية ألعاب (siḥrīya) legerdemain, sleight of hand, magic; العاب القوى a. as-quwā athletics, specif., track and
field; نارية العاب (nārīya) fireworks; ساحة األلعاب athletic field; األتعاب مدرس mudarris al-a. athletic coach, athletics instructor
لعب la‘ib funny, amusing, merry, gay
لعبة la‘ba (n. un.) game; trick
لعبة lu‘ba pl. لعب lu‘ab plaything, toy; doll; butt for mirth or derision, sport, laughingstock
li‘‘īb لعيب and la‘‘āb لعاب lu‘ba, لعبة
very playful
لعاب lu‘āb saliva, spittle; slaver, drivel
│ الشمس لعاب l. aš-šams gossamer, air threads; على لعابه سال his mouth watered for
…
لعابي lu‘ābī salivary; mucous, slimy
لعيبة lu‘aiba pl. -āt (little) doll
لعوب la‘ūb flighty, coquettish, flirtatious (woman); playful, dallying, trifling
العوبة ul‘ūba pl. االعيب alā‘īb  plaything, toy; play, sport, dalliance; fun; prank; trick
ملعب mal‘ab pl. مالعب malā‘ib  playground; athletic field, stadium; playhouse, theater; scene; circus ring; pl.
مالعب malā‘ib matches, contests, events (in sports)
ملعبة mal‘aba plaything, toy
تالعب talā‘ub game (e.g., of a speculator, of a gambler), gamble; free play │ التالعب مجال (majāl) free play, free scope, elbow-room; latitude, margin; clearance
العب lā‘ib playing; player; sportsman; athlete; gymnast │ الجنباز العب l. al-jumbāz gymnast, athlete
ملعوب mal‘ūb pl. مالعيب malā‘īb  covered with spittle; slobbering, driveling, drooling; prank, trick, ruse, artifice
مالعب mulā‘ib fellow player; playmate, playfellow; fraudulent
لعثم II tala‘tama to hesitate; to falter, stutter, stammer
لعثمة la‘tama and لعثم tala‘tum
hesitation; stuttering, stutter
متلعثم mutala‘tim and اللسان متلعثم m. al- lisān stammering, stuttering
لعج la‘aja a (la‘j) to hurt, be sore, burn III to oppress, distress, agonize (ه s.o.)
لعجة la‘ja pain
العج lā‘ij pl. لواعج lawā‘ij  ardent, burning (esp., love); pl. لواعج ardent love, ardor (of love)
العس al‘as , f. لعساء la‘sā’  red-lipped
لعق la‘iqa a (la‘q, لعقة la‘qa, lu‘qa) to lick (ھ s.th.)
لعقة la‘qa spoonful
لعوق la‘ūq electuary
│ spoon malā‘iq  مالعق pl. mil‘aqa ملعقة teaspoon ملعقة شاي
 لعل la‘l garnet (min.)
 لعل la‘alla see  عل
لعلع la‘la‘a to resound, reverberate, clang, roar, boom II tala‘la‘a to shimmer, glimmer, gleam, flicker; to be starved; 869 to be parched with thirst; to be
لعلع la‘la‘ pl. لعالع la‘āli‘  vibration of fata morgana
 لعن la‘ana a (la‘n) to curse, damn, execrate (ه s.o.), utter imprecations (ه against s.o.) III to utter the oath of condemnation (لعان li‘ān, q.v.) VI to curse each other
لعن la‘n cursing, execration, malediction
لعنة la‘na pl. la‘anāt, لعان li‘ān curse; execration, imprecation │ عليه ﷲ لعنة God’s curse upon him!
لعنة lu‘na damned, cursed, confounded; execrable, abominable
لعان li‘ān oath of condemnation; sworn allegation of adultery committed by either husband or wife (Isl. Law)
لعين la‘īn and ملعون mal‘ūn pl. مالعين malā‘īn  cursed; confounded; damned; outcast, execrable; detested, abhorred, abominable; اللعين the Evil One, the Devil
متالعن mutalā‘in cursing each other, hostile, inimical
لك لعا la‘an laka call to one who has stumbled: may you rise again!
لغوب lugūb, lagub exhaustion, lassitude, fatigue, weariness; great pains, trouble, toil
الغب lāgib pl. لغب luggab languid, fatigued, weary, tired
لغد lugd pl. الغاد algād, لغود lugūd and لغدود lugdūd pl. لغاديد lagādīd  flesh at the throat and under the chin
لغز lagaza u (lagz) to speak in riddles; to equivocate III and IV do.
لغز lugz pl. الغاز algāz riddle, puzzle; enigma; conundrum; mystery, secret │ O المتقاطعة الكلمات لغز l. al-kalimāt al- mutaqāṭi‘a crossword puzzle
ملغز mulgaz puzzling, enigmatic, cryptic, mysterious; dark, obscure, ambiguous, equivocal
لغط lagaṭa a (lagṭ, لغاط ligāṭ) to be clamorous and noisy; to raise a din; to shout, clamor II and IV do.
لغط lagṭ, lagaṭ, pl. الغاط algāṭ noise, din; clamor, shouting; lamentation (عن over or for s.th.) i uproar, turmoil, tumult
 لغم lagama to mine, plant with mines (ھ s.th.)
لغم lugm, lagam pl. الغام algām mine
لغم lagm and الغام ilgām mining (e.g., of a harbor, of a road, etc.)
  لغمIV to amalgamate, alloy with mercury
لغام lugām foam, froth
الغام ilgām amalgamation
لغمط lagmaṭa (eg.) to smear, sully, soil
لغو) لغا) lagā u (lagw) to speak; to be null; -- لغا lagā u (lagw) and لغي lagiya a (لغا lagan, الغية lāgiya, ملغاة malgāh) to talk nonsense; to make mistakes (in speaking) sV to render ineffectual (ھ s.th.); to declare null and void or invalid, invalidate, nullify, annul, abolish, abrogate, eliminate (ھ s.th.), do away (ھ with s.th.); to cancel (ھ a project); to withdraw (ھ permission, a motion)
لغو lagw foolish talk; nonsense; null, nugatory, ineffectual; mistake, blunder, ungrammatical language
لغة luga pl. -āt language; dialect; idiom; vernacular; lingo, jargon; word; expression, term; اللغة classical Arabic │ اجنبية لغة (ajnabīya) foreign language; لغة عامية (‘āmmīya) popular language; الكناية لغة literary language; المحادثة لغة l. al- muḥādata colloquial language; المھنة لغة l. al-mihna professional jargon, slang; لغة المولد l. al-maulid mother 870 tongue; اھل اللغة ahl al-l. philologists, lexicographers; اللغة علم ‘ilm al-l. lexicography, philology, linguistic science, linguistics
لغوة lagwa dialect, idiom, vernacular
لغوي lugawī linguistic; philologic(al); lexicographic(al); philologist, lexicographer, linguist; لغويات linguistic matters, philologica
إلغاء ilgā’ abolishment, abolition, abrogation, repeal, elimination, cancellation, revocation, rescission; annulment, nullification, quashing; countermand
الغ lāgin abrogated, repealed, annulled, canceled, invalid, ineffective, null and void
الغية lāgiya grammatical mistake, incorrect usage
 ملغى mulgan abrogated, repealed, annulled, canceled, invalid, void; abolished; expired; suppressed; negligible
لف laffa u (laff) to wrap up, roll up, fold up (ھ s.th.); to wind, coil, spool, reel (ھ s.th.); to wind (ھ على s.th. on; ھ على s.th. around), twist, wrap, fold (ھ على s.th. around); to envelop (ب or ھ في s.th. in or with), cover, swathe, swaddle (ھ s.th. ب or في in or with), wrap, infold (ب or ھ في s.th. in); to connect (ھ ب s.th. with), join, attach (٠ ب s.th. to); to grow densely, be overgrown, form a tangled mass; to make a round of calls (على on), visit (على people); (eg.) to go around s.th. (ھ), go about s.th. (ھ) in a roundabout way, make a detour, beat about the bush │ لفه لف (laffahū) to do just like s.o., be of the same kind as s.o., belong to the same sort as s.o. II to wrap up or infold tightly V to wrap o.s. up (في in), cover o.s. (في with) VIII do.; to wind, twist, coil; to turn, make a turn (automobile, etc.); to intertwine, grow in a tangled mass; to gather, assemble, rally ( حول around); to clasp, enclose, encircle, embrace (ب s.th.)
لف laff winding, coiling; wrapping, enfolding; rolling, folding; (eg.) circumambience, circumvention, detour, roundabout way, subterfuge, dodge, excuses; pl. الفاف alfāf swaddling clothes, diapers │ والدوران اللف (dawarān) detours and evasions; ونشر لف (našr) folding and unfolding; involution and evolution (rhet.); لف غير من without much ado, without ceremony
لف liff pl. الفاف alfāf densely growing trees; pl. thicket, scrub, undergrowth, brushwood
لفة laffa pl. -āt turn, rotation, revolution; coil, twist, convolution, whorl, spire; winding; roll, scroll; pack, packet, package, bundle, bale; turban │ بريدية لفة (barīdīya) postal package; الرق من لفات (raqq) parchment scrolls
لفافة lifāfa pl. -āt, لفائف lafā’if wrapping, covering, cover, envelope; wrapper, wrap; altar cloth, cloth covering the paten and chalice (Copt.-Chr.); bandage; swaddling band; puttee; cigarette (also التبغ من لفافة min at-tibg); pl. لفائف (fig.) guise (of s.th.)
لفيف lafīf gathered, assembled; crowded, thronging; multitude, crowd, swarm, body, cluster, group (من of people); mixed company │ الناس لفيف mob, rabble, riffraff; األجنبي اللفيف (ajnabī) the Foreign Legion
لفيفة lafīfa bundle; package, pocket, pack; cigarette
الف alaff  f. لفاء laffā’  stout, plump (figure, body)
ملف milaff pl. -āt reel, spool; coil (el.); winding; wrapping, covering, casing; blanket, sleeping blanket; cover, wrapper, jacket (of a book, etc.); (letter) envelope; folder, portfolio; letter file; 871 dossier │ O التأثير ملف induction coil (el.); O ملف ابتدائي (ibtidā’ī) primary coil (el.); O ملف خانق choking coil, choke (el.)
ملفاف milfāf wrapping, covering, cover
تلفيف talfīf pl. تالفيف talāfīf  winding; coil, twist, convolution, whorl, spire; pl. تالفيف expletive after في, e.g., تالفيف في سويدائھا (suwaidā’ihā) in the depth of her heart; الظالم تالفيف في (ẓalām) in the dark; تالفيفه بين in it, inside it, around in it
التفاف iltifāf turn; bypassing, outflanking, sank movement, envelopment, surrounding
ملفوف malfūf wound, coiled; wrapped up (في in); rolled up, rolled together, convolute; twisted, wound (على around); fastened, attached (على to); swathed (ب in or with); plump, stout (body); (syr.) cabbage
ملتف multaff winding, twisting, coiling; wound, coiled; rolled up, rolled together, convolute; spirally wound; intertwined, interwoven, entwined; gathered, assembled, grouped (حول around); clasping, enclosing, embracing, encircling (ب s.th.)
لفت lafata i (laft) and IV to turn, bend, tilt, incline, direct (ھ الى s.th. to or toward), focus (ھ الى s.th. on); to turn sway, avert (ھ عن s.th. from) │ الى نظره لفت (naẓarahū), الى نظره الفت to turn one’s eyes or one’s attention to; to direct s.o.’s eyes to, call s.o.’s attention to; النظر لفت to catch the eye, attract attention; to be impressive,
 stately, imposing; النظر الفت do.; الناس لفت to attract, interest, or captivate people V to turn, turn around, turn one’s face (الى to); to look around, glance around; to peer around │ حوله تلفت (ḥaulahū) to look around, glance around; ويسرة يمنة تلفت (yamnatan wa-yasratan) he looked to the right and left VIII to turn, turn around, turn one’s face (الى to); to wheel around, turn around; to address o.s. (الى to); to pay attention, attend (الى to), heed, observe, bear in mind, consider, take into account, take into consideration (الى s.th.); to take care (الى of), care (الى for) │ حوله التفت (ḥaulahū) to look around, glance about X to attract (ھ the eye, attention); to claim, arouse, awaken (ھ the interest, the attention, من of s.o.) │ نظره استلفت (or انظاره) to arouse or attract s.o.’s attention, catch s.o.’s eye
لفت lift turnip (Brassica rapa L.; bot.)
لفتة lafta (n. un.) turnabout, about-face; (pl. lalatāt) turn, turning; gesture; sideglance, glance, a furtive, casual, or quick, look
لفات lafāt and لفوت lafūt ill-tempered, surly, sullen
الفت alfat , f. لفتاء laftā’ , pl. لفت luft left- handed
التفات iltifāt turn, inclination, turning (الى to, toward); attention, notice, heed; regard, consideration; care, solicitude; sudden transition (styl.) │ االلتفات بدون bi-dūn l-ilt. inattentive(ly); الى االلتفات بدون   inconsiderate of, without consideration for; االلتفات عدم ‘adam al-ilt. inattention; االلتفات بعين اليه نظر (bi-‘ain l-ilt.) to give s.th. sympathetic consideration
استلفاتة istilfāta (n. vic.) a turning (الى to, toward); turn of the face or eyes; side- glance, glance
استلفات istilfāt stimulation of attention الفتة lāfita sign (bearing an inscription) ملفت mulfit: للنظر ملفت (naẓar) attracting
attention, striking, conspicuous
ملتفت multafit turning around, looking ( الى at); regardful; attentive; heedful, careful; considerate
لفح lafaḥa a (lafḥ, لفحان lafaḥān) to burn, scorch, sear (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); -- (lafḥ) to 872 strike lightly; to touch, brush (ھ s.th., e.g., of the breath)
لفحة lafḥa pl. lafaḥāt fire, heat (esp., of fever)
lawāfiḥ  لوافح pl. lāfiḥ الفح and lafūḥ لفوح
burning, scorching, searing
لفاح luffāḥ mandrake (Mandragora officinarum; bot.)
لفظ lafaẓa i (lafz) to emit (ھ ب، s.th.); to spit out (ھ ب، s.th.); to eject (ھ ب، s.th.); to throw (ه s.o.) out (من of); to speak, enunciate, articulate; to pronounce, utter, express, voice, say (ه ب، s.th.) │ النفس لفظ األخير (nafas) to breathe one’s last, die, expire; to be in the throes of death; لفظ انفاسه (anfāsahū) to be in the throes of death, breathe one’s last; النواة لفظ لفظه (lafẓa n-nawāh) to spit s.th. out like a date pit, brush s.th. aside, reject s.th., dismiss s.th. V to pronounce, enunciate, articulate (ب s.th.)
لفظ lafẓ pl. الفاظ alfāẓ sound-group, phonetic complex; expression, term; word; wording; formulation; articulation, enunciation, pronunciation; لفظا verbatim, literally │ ومعنى لفظا (ma‘nan) in letter and spirit; اللفظ أخطأ (akṭa’a) to mispronounce
لفظي lafẓī of or pertaining to words, verbal; literal; pronounced; oral
لفظة lafẓa pl. lafaẓāt word; utterance, saying
لفيظ lafīẓ ejected, emitted; pronounced, uttered
تلفظ talaffuẓ pronunciation, enunciation, articulation
ملفوظ malfūẓ ejected, emitted; pronounced, uttered
لفع lafa‘a a (laf‘): رأسه الشيب لفع l. š-šaibu ra’sahū grey hair covered his bead II to cover (ھ s.th., ب with) │ رأسه الشيب لفع l. š- šaibu ra’sahū = I; V and VIII to wrap o.s. up (ب in)
ملفع milfa‘ head shawl, muffler
لفق II to invent, fabricate (ھ s.th.); to concoct, contrive, devise, think out (ھ s.th.); to
 falsify (ھ s.th.); to trump up (ھ s.th.); to patch up, piece together (الى a s.th. with)
تلفيق talfīq invention, fabrication, concoction, fibbing; falsification
تلفيقة talfīqa pl. -āt invented story, fib, yarn
ملفق mulaffaq invented, fabricated, trumped up, fake, fictitious; concocted, contrived, devised; patched up, pieced together; embellished with lies
لفلف laflafa to wrap up, envelop, cover (a s.th.) II talaflafa to wrap o.s. up (ب في، in)
لفو IV to find (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) VI to put right, to right, repair, correct (ھ s.th.); to make good (ھ a deficiency), eliminate, remove ( ھ a danger); to remedy (ھ s.th.); to redress (ھ a loss, and the like), make up (ھ for a loss)
مالفاة mulāfāh correction, adjustment, elimination (of a deficiency)
تالف talāfin repair, correction; elimination, removal (of a deficiency, of a danger); remedy; redress, reparation
لقب II to call, surname (ه ب s.o. by an agnomen or title) V to be surnamed (ب by an agnomen or title)
لقب laqab pl. القاب alqāb agnomen; nickname; title, honorific; last name, surname, family name (as opposed to اسم given name, first name) │ البطولة لقب title of champion (in sports)
ملقب mulaqqab surnamed, nicknamed, called (ب by the laqab ...) 873
لقح laqaḥa a (laqḥ) and II to impregnate, fecundate, pollinate (ھ s.th.); to graft, bud (ھ a tree); to inoculate, vaccinate (ه s.o.)
VI	to cross-pollinate
لقح laqḥ impregnation, fecundation, pollination
لقاح laqāḥ seed, semen, sperm; pollen; infective agent, virus; vaccine │ الجدري لقاح
l. al-judarī variolovaccine; O الوقاية لقاح
serum
تلقيح talqīḥ impregnation, fecundation, pollination, grafting, budding; inoculation, vaccination │ الجدرى تلقيح t. al-judarī vaccination (against smallpox)
pollen al-lawāqiḥ  daqīq دقيق اللواقح
ملقح mulaqqaḥ inoculated, vaccinated
لقس laqis: النفس لقس l. an-nafs annoyed, cross
لقط laqaṭa u (laqṭ) to gather, collect, pick up from the ground, glean (ھ s.th.) II
= I V to gather, glean (ھ s.th.); to pick up (ھ s.th., also, e.g., with the ear) VIII = I; to receive (ھ radio waves, a radio message; to take (ھ a picture; phot.) │ صورة التقط (ṣūra) to make a picture
لقط laqaṭ that which ill picked up or gathered, leftovers, gleanings
لقطة luqṭa that which ill picked up or gleaned, gleanings; article or thing found; (lucky) find; (eg.) bargain, pickup
لقاط luqāṭ and لقاطة luqāṭa that which is picked up or gleaned; leftover ears of grain, gleanings; offal, refuse
لقيط laqīṭ pl. لقطاء luqatā’  picked up, found; foundling
لقيطة laqīṭa (female) foundling
ملقط milqaṭ pl. مالقط malāqiṭ  (pair of) tongs, pincers; (pair of) tweezers, pincette; (pair of) pliers │ الجنين ملقط forceps; ملقط النار fire tongs
التقاط iltiqāt gathering, collection, gleaning; taking up, picking up; reception (radio) │ االلتقاط جھاز jahāẓ al-ilt. receiver (radio)
القط lāqiṭ receiving (radio set); gleaner; gatherer │ O الصوت القط l. aṣ-ṣaut pickup (of a phonograph); phonograph; O القطة األلغام mine sweeper
ملتقط multaqiṭ finder
لقع laqa‘a a (laq‘) to throwaway, discard (ھ s.th.)
لقف laqifa a (laqf, لقفان laqatan) to seize quickly, grab, snatch (ھ s.th.); to catch (ھ s.th.); to snatch up, take over (ھ عن s.th. from s.o.) V and VIII do.; to seize (ھ on), rob, usurp (ھ s.th.)
لقلق laqlaqa to clatter (stork); to babble, chatter, prattle
لقالق pl. laqlāq لقالق and laqlaq لقلق
laqāliq  stork
 لقلقة laqlaqa clatter (of a stork); babble, chatter, prattle; (eg.) gossip
 لقم laqama u (laqm) to clog up, obstruct, block (ھ s.th.); -- laqima a (/aqrn) to eat, devour. gobble, swallow up (ھ s.th.) II to feed bit by bit (ه s.o.); to load (ھ a weapon; syr.) │ القھوة لقم (qahwa) to stir ground coffee into hot water IV to make (ه s.o.) swallow; to feed bit by bit (ه s.o.) VIII to devour, swallow up (ھ s.th.) لقمة luqma pl. لقم luqam bite; bit, mouthful; little piece, morsel │ سائغة لقمة titbit, choice morsel: ل سائغة لقمة جعله (ja‘alahū) to make s.o. an easy prey of ...; القاضي لقمة pastry of fine flour, fried in oil like doughnuts and sprinkled with sugar or honey
لقيمة luqaima pl. -āt snack, bit, morsel
ملقم mulaqqim pl. -ūn (syr.; mil.) assistant gunner, loader, cannoneer no. 1
  لقمي laqmī or القمي (magr.) palm wine 874
  لقمان luqmān  Lokman, a legendary sage and author of numerous fables │ لقمان دار بقيت حالھا على (baqiyat) everything has remained as before
لقن laqina a (لقانة laqāna, لقانية laqāniya) to understand, grasp (ھ s.th.); to gather, infer, note (ھ s.th.) II to teach (ه ھ s.o. s.th.), instruct (ه ھ s.o. in); to dictate (ه ھ to s.o. s.th.); to instill, infuse, inculcate, inspire (ه ھ in s.o. s.th.), insinuate, suggest (ه ھ to s.o. s.th.); to whisper (ه ھ to s.o. s.th.), prompt (ه s.o.) V = I; to learn, receive, get (ھ من s.th. from), be informed (ھ من of s.th. by)
لقانة laqāna and لقانية laqāniya quick understanding, grasp
تلقين talqīn instruction, direction; dictation; dictate; inspiration, insinuation, suggestion; suborning of a witness (Isl.
Law)
ملقن mulaqqin prompter; inspirer; a faqīh who instructs the deceased at his grave what to tell the two angels of death
لقوة laqwa facial paralysis
لقي laqiya a (لقاء liqā’, لقيان luqyān, لقي luqy, لقية luqya, لقى luqan) to encounter (ھ، ه s.o., s.th.), meet (ه ھ، with s.o., with s.th.); to meet (ه s.o.); to come across s.o.
or s.th. (ه ھ،), light upon s.o. or s.th. (ه ھ،); to find (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to experience, undergo, suffer, endure (III s.th.), meet with s.th. (ھ); to fall to s.o.’s (ه) lot or share III to meet, come to meet (ه s.o.); to encounter (ه s.o.), have an encounter (ه with); to come across s.o. or s.th. (ه ھ،), light upon s.o. or s.th. (ه ھ،); to experience, undergo, suffer, endure (ھ s.th.). meet (ھ with s.th.); to receive, get, obtain, achieve (ھ s.th.) │ صاغية آذانا القى (ṣāgiyatan) to find willing ears IV to throw, cast, fling (ھ s.th.); to throw off, throw down. drop (ھ s.th.); to throw away, discard (ھ s.th.); to put or lay (ھ s.th.) before s.o. (على), submit (ھ على s.th. to s.o.), pose (ھ على a question to s.o.); to report (على or ھ الى on s.th. to s.o.), set forth (على or ھ الى s.th. to s.o.); to recite, play, sing (ھ a song, a musical composition); to present (ھ s.th., e.g., a broadcast); to give (ھ a lecture), hold (ھ a class), make, deliver (ھ a speech); to extend (ھ a greeting, الى to s.o.); to impose, lay (ھ على s.th. on s.o.), burden (ھ على with s.th. s.o.) │ ل باال القى الى، باله القى  to pay attention to; عن بيانا القى (bayānan) to make a statement about or on; البيض القى (baiḍ) to lay eggs; الى بزمامه القى (bi- ẓimāmihī) or فالن الى امره مقاليد القى (m. amrihī) to lay one’s rate in s.o.’s hands, entrust one’s fate to s.o.; بنفسه القى (binafsihī) to throw o.s. into, plunge into; احضانه في بنفسه القى (aḥḍānihī) to throw o.s. into s.o.’s arms; بيده القى (bi-yadihī) to surrender to s.o., give o.s. up to s.o.; القى الغارب على الحبل (ḥabl) to give froe rein, give a free hand, impose no restraint; القى على خطابا to make a public address to; القى الدرس (dars) to recite the lesson; الرعب القى قلبه في (ru‘b, qalbih`i) to strike terror to s.o.’s heart, frighten, alarm s.o.; السالح القى to lay down one’s arms, capitulate, surrender; اليه المع القى (sam‘) to lend one’s ear to s.o., listen to s.o.; اسماعھم اليه القوا (asmā‘ahum) they lent him their ears, they listened to him; سؤاال عليه القى (suālan) to put a question to s.o., ask s.o. a question; شيئا عاتقه على القى to impose s.th. on s.o., hold s.o. responsible for; علوما القى to teach sciences; على القبض القى (qabḍ) to arrest s.o.; على القنابل القى to drop bombs on s.th., bomb s.th.; القول عليه القى (qaul) to dictate to
 s.o.; to direct, instruct s.o., give s.o. instructions; الطالق كلمة عليھا القى (kalimata ṭ-ṭalāq) he pronounced the formula of divorce against her; محاضرة القى (muhāḍara) to give a lecture, hold a class; ٥٧٨ عليه المسؤولية القى (mas’ūlīya) to place the responsibility on s.o., saddle s.o. with the responsibility V receive (ه ,ھ s.o., s.th.); to take, accept (ھ s.th.); to get, obtain (ھ s.th.); to learn (ھ عن of s.th. from), be informed (ھ عن of s.th. by); to learn (على or ھ عن s.th. from s.o.), take lessons (عن from s.o.), be taught, be instructed, be coached (عن by s.o.) │ تلقى امرا (amran) to receive an order, have orders (soldier); األوامر تلقى to take orders (com., and the like); والقبول بالتسليم تلقاه (qabūl) to agree wholeheartedly to s.th., submit willingly to s.th.; في دروسا تلقى to take lessons in (some field, ort, science, eto.); الجامعة في العلوم تلقى to study at the university VI to meet, join each other, come together, get together VIII do.; to encounter, meet (ب s.o.) X to throw o.s. down; to lie down, lie
لقى laqan pl. القاء alqā’ offal, discard
لقية luqya encounter, meeting; luqya, laqīya s.th. found, a find
لقيا luqyā encounter, meeting
لقاية liqāya encounter, meeting; s.th. found, a find
القية ulqiya riddle, conundrum
تلقاء tilqā’a (prep.) opposite; in front of
│ نفسه تلقاء من min tilqā’i nafsihī or تلقاء من ذاته by o.s., of one’s own accord, spontaneously, automatically
تلقائي tilqā’ī automatic; spontaneous;
تلقائيا spontaneously, automatically
ملقى malqan pl. مالق malāqin meeting place, rendezvous; junction, crossing, intersection; road or street intersection, crossroads
لقاء liqā’ encounter; meeting; get together; reunion; liqā’a (prep.) in exchange for, in return for, for, on │ الى كفالة (kafāla) on bail; اللقاء الى good by! so long! au revoir!
مالقاة mulāqāh encounter, meeting, get- together, reunion; reception
القاء ilqā’ throwing, casting, throw, cast, fling; delivery, diction; dictation; recitation, recital │ اإللقاء علم ‘ilm al-i. elocution
تلق talaqqin receipt, reception, acceptance; acquisition (also of a skill, of knowledge, eto.); learning (of an art, skill, eto.); pursuit (of studies) │ في العلوم تلقى studies at (e.g., at a university)
تالق talāqin meeting, encounter
التقاء iltiqā’ meeting, reunion (مع with)
mulqiyāt ملقيات األلغام البحرية mulqin: ملق layers mine al-baḥrīya al-a.
ملى mulqan thrown, cast, discarded
ملتقى multaqan pl. ملتقيات multaqayāt meeting place, rendezvous; gathering point, collecting center; intersection, junction, confluence, crossroads │ الى الملتقى good-by! so long! au revoir!
 لك lakka u (lakk) to hit with the fist, to cuff, buffet, pommel (ه s.o.) VIII to be pressed together, thickly set, crammed, jammed, crowded; to crowd together, gather in a mass; to make mistakes or blunders, speak ungrammatically
 لك lakk pl. الكاك alkāk, لكوك lukūk lac, one hundred thousand (specif., 100,000 rupees)
 لك lukk, lakk resin; lao; sealing wax
لكأ laka’a a (لكء lak’) to strike, hit; -- لكئ laki’a a (لكأ laka’) to abide, remain, stay (ب at a place) V to be tardy, dilatory, slow, to dawdle, tarry, hesitate (في in s.th.); to loiter, loaf, hang about │ األداء في تلكأ (adā’) to be in default, fail to meet one’s financial obligations
لكأة luka’a hesitant, tardy, dilatory, sluggish, slow; behindhand, in arrears, defaulting 876
لكز lakaza u (lakz) to strike with the fist; to kick (ه s.o.), to thrust (ه s.o.)
لكز lakiz miserly, stingy
لكاز likāz pin, nail; peg
لكيع lakī‘ pl. لكعاء luka‘ā’ moan, base, ignominious, disgraceful, wicked, depraved; silly, foolish
 لكاعة lakā‘a meanness, baseness, disgracefulness, wickedness, depravity
لكم lakama u (lakm) to strike with the fist, box, punch III to engage in a fiat fight, box (ه with s.o.)
لكمة lakma pl. lakamāt blow with the fist, punch
ملكمة milkama boxing glove
مالكمة mulākama fist fight, boxing matoh
مالكم mulākim boxer, pugilist, prize fighter
 لكن lakina a (lakan, لكن lukna, لكونة lukūna, لكنونة luknūna) to speak incorrectly, barbarously; to stammer
لكنة lukna stutter, stammer; incorrect usage, ungrammatical language; incorrect pronunciation
لكانة lakāna: الكالم في لكانة (kalām) speech defect, faltering way of speaking
الكن alkan , f. لكناء laknā’ , pl. لكن lukn speaking incorrectly; stammering, stuttering
  لكنlakan pl. الكان alkān basin, copper basin
 لكن lākin, lakinna see الكن
لكي li-kai, لكيما li-kai-mā see ل li
 لم lam (particle, with foll. apoc.) not │ يكتب لم
lam yaktub he did not write; الم a-lam not ... though? لكم اقل الم (aqul) haven’t I told you, though? اال -- لم lam -- illā only, nothing but, just, not till, not before
  لم lima = لما li-mā, see ل li
 لم lamma u (lamm) to gather, collect, assemble (ھ s.th.); to reunite (ھ s.th.); to arrange, settle, put in order (ھ s.th.); to repair (ھ s.th.), pass. lumma to suffer from or be stricken by a slight mental derangement │ شعثه لم (ša‘atahū) to put s.th. in order again, straighten s.th. out, put s.th. right; to recover, pick up; to help
s.o. get back on his feet, القطيع شمل لم (šamla l-q.) to round up the herd IV to befall, overcome (fatigue, fear, weakness, adversities, etc.; s.o.); to pay (ب s.o.) a short visit, call ( on s.o.), stop, stay (ب at s.o.’s house); to have sexual intercourse ( ب with s.o.); to broach (ب a topic), .peak (
ب about). discuss (ب s.th.), to give a survey (ب of), outline, state briefly (ب s.th.), to touch briefly (ب on a subject), to be acquainted or familiar (.	with s.th.),
to get to know (ب s.th.), to familiarize o.s., acquaint o.s. (ب with s.th.), to commit, perpetrate (ب a crime), to take, consume ( ب food, drink) VIII to gather, assemble, rally; to unite; to visit (s.o.), call (ه on)
لمة lamma pl. لمام limām collection; gathering, assembly; visit, call; misfortune, calamity, slight mental derangement, touch of insanity
لمة limma pl. لمم limam curl, ringlet, lock
لمة lumma traveling party; group, troop, body (of people)
لمم lamam slight mental derangement
لماما limāman occasionally, from time to time, rarely, seldom
لمام lammām wild thyme (bot.)
المام ilmām knowledge, cognizance (ب of s.th.); acquaintance, familiarity, conversance (ب with); (pl. -āt) survey, outline, summary, resume
المة lāmma evil eye 877
ملموم malmūm collected, gathered, assembled; concentrated at one point; slightly insane
ملم mulimm completely familiar, conversant (ب with); expert, connoisseur
literate ملم بالقراءة والكتابة │
ملمة mulimma pl. -āt misfortune, calamity, disaster
 لما li-mā see ل li
 لما lammd (conj.) when, as, after; since, whereas; (particle; with foll. apoc.) not, not yet
لمباجو (Engl.) lambāgō lumbago
لمبة lamba pl. -āt lamp; tube (radio)
لمج V to take a snack
لمجة lumja appetizer, hors d’oeuvre, relish, snack
لمح lamaḥa a (lamḥ) to glance (الى or ه at s.o.); to see, sight, behold, notice (ه s.o., ھ s.th.);
 to become aware (ان that); -- (lamḥ, لمحان lamaḥān, تلماح talmāḥ) to flash, sparkle, glisten, shimmer II to insinuate, intimate, give to understand (الى s.th.), hint (الى at), allude, refer (الى to) III to cast a casual or furtive glance (ه at s.o.) IV to glance casually or furtively (الى or ه at s.o.)
moment, glance; look, quick lamḥ لمح the of glance al-baṣar l. لمح البصر │ instant في لمح البصر، كلمح البصر، دون لمح البصر، eye; lightning, like (aqalla) في اقل من لمح البصر time no in instantly, trice, a in
لمحة lamḥa pl. lamaḥāt quick, casual look, glance; wink; glow of light, light, brightness, flash (of lightning) │ لمحة فيه ابيه من (abīhi) he looks like his father
لماح lammāḥ shimmering, gleaming, shining
مالمح malāmiḥ  features, lineaments; traits; outward appearance, looks │ فيه
ابيه من مالمح (abīhi) he looks like his father; وظالل مالمح (ẓilāl) lights and shades (in painting)
تلميح talmīḥ pl. تالميح talāmīḥ  allusion, intimation, insinuation, hint, reference; تلميحا by way of suggestion, indirectly
لمز lamaza u i (lamz) to give (ه s.o.) a wink; to speak ill (ه of s.o.), carp (ه at s.o.), find fault (ه with s.o.), criticize, blame, censure, backbite, slander, defame (ه s.o.)
لمزة lumaza and لماز lammāz fault- finder, captious critic, caviler, carper
 لمس lamasa u i (lams) to touch, handle, feel with the hand, finger (ھ s.th.), pass one’s hand (ھ over s.th.); to seek (ھ s.th.), look, search, ask (ھ for); to perceive, notice (ھ s.th., الى that), become aware (ھ of s.th., ان that) │ يلمس ال (yulmasu) intangible, impalpable; الحقائق لمس to take thing, as they are, face the facts III to be in touch or contact (ه ھ، with s.o., with s.th.); to touch, feel, finger, palpate (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to have sexual intercourse (ھا with a woman) V to feel out, finger, palpate (ھ s.th.); to fumble, grope about; to grope, fumble (ھ for s.th.); to look, search (ھ for); to ask (ھ for) VI to touch each other, be in mutual contact VIII to request (من ھ s.th. from s.o., ل for s.o.), ask (ھ من for s.th. s.o.), solicit (ه ل s.th. for); to beg (ھ
for), request urgently (ھ s.th.); to seek (ھ s.th.), look, search (ھ ه، for s.th., for s.o.)
لمس lams feeling, groping; touching, touch │ اللمس حاسة ḥāssat al-l. sense of touch
لمسى lamsī tactual, tactile, of or pertaining to the sense of touch
لمسية lamsīya (tun.) date which has not attained full ripeness
لمسة lamsa (n. vic.) touch; (pl. -āt) retouch 878
لميس lamīs soft to the touch
ملمس malmas pl. مالمس malāmis  place of touch, spot touched, point of contact; O feeler, tentacle (of insects); touch; contact
touch the to soft ناعم الملمس │
ملمسي malmasī tactual, tactile
مالمسة mulāmasa touching, touch, contact; feeling, fingering, palpation; sexual intercourse
تلمس talammus search, quest
التماس iltimās request, solicitation; application, petition
ملموس malmūs touched, felt; palpable, tangible; ملموسات things perceptible to the touch, tangible things
ملتمس multamas pl. -āt request, petition, application
 الماس look up alphabetically
لمص lamaṣ u (lamṣ) to rail (ه at s.o.); to make faces (ه at s.o.)
لمظ lamaẓa u (lamẓ) to lick one’s lips; to smack one’s lips V do. │ بذكره تلمظ (bi- dikrihī) to speak ill of s.o., backbite s.o.
لمع lama‘a (lam‘, لمعان lama‘ān) to gleam, glitter, twinkle, flash, sparkle, glisten, shimmer, shine │ بسيفه لمع (bi-saifihī) to brandish the sword; بيده لمع (bi-yadihī) to wave one’s hand; خاطر رأسه في لمع (kāṭirun) a thought flashed through his mind II to cause (ھ s.th.) to shine, gleam, or twinkle; to shine (ھ s.th.), give brightness (ھ to s.th.); to polish (ھ s.th.); to burnish (ھ s.th.) IV to wave (one’s hand); to point out, give to understand, intimate, insinuate (الى s.th.), hint (الى at),
 allude (الى to) VIII to flash, radiate, glow, shine; to sparkle, glitter, gleam
لمع lam‘ and لمعان lama‘ān luster, sheen, shine; shimmer, gleam, glow, brightness, light
لمعة lum‘a pl. لمع luma‘, لماع limā‘ shimmer, gleam, glow, flash, sparkle, glitter, brilliancy, radiance, beam; gloss, luster, burnish, polish; some, a little
لماع lammā‘ bright, brilliant, lustrous, sparkling, flashing, glistening, shining, radiant; O glossy, glazed, burnished, polished, satined, calendered (tech.) │ جلد لماع (jild) patent leather
المع alma‘  and المعي alma‘ī sagacious, smart, shrewd, clever, bright, intelligent;
-- المع alma‘ more lustrous, shinier
المعية alma‘īya sagacity, smartness, shrewdness, cleverness, brightness, intelligence
تلميع talmī‘ polishing, polish
الماعة ilmā‘a allusion, hint
المع lāmi‘ pl. لوامع lawāmi‘  brilliant, lustrous, shining, gleaming, shimmering
المعة lāmi‘a fontanel (anat.); (pl. لوامع
lawāmi‘ ) gloss, shine
متلمع mutalammi‘ radiant, brilliant, shining, lustrous
لملم lamlama to gather, gather up (ھ s.th.)
ململمة mulamlama trunk, proboscis (of the elephant)
لن lan (conj.; with foll. subj.) not (referring to the future)
لنج جديد (eg.) gad`id lang brand-new
لندرة landra London
لندن landan London
لنش (Engl.) lanš pl. -āt launch, small steamer, motorboat
لنينغراد leningrād Leningrad
لھب lahiba a (lahb, lahab, لھاب luhāb, لھيب lahīb, لھبان lahabān) to flame, burn, blaze II and IV to kindle, light, set on fire, ignite, inflame (ھ s.th.); to excite, stir 879 up, provoke (ھ s.th.) V to flame; to be aflame, be ablaze, burn (also fig.: cheek,
anger, thirst, etc.) VIII = V; to catch fire, flare up; to be inflamed (also med.)
لھب lahab, lahīb and لھاب luhāb flame, blaze, flare
lihāb لھاب pl. lahbā, لھبى f. lahbān, لھبان
parched with thirst
الھاب ilhāb kindling, lighting, ignition, inflammation
التھاب iltihāb burning; inflammation (also med.); in compounds corresponding to Engl. “-it is” │ الشعب التھاب ilt. aš-šu‘ab bronchitis
التھابي iltihābī inflammatory; inflammable
ملتھب multahib burning, flaming, blazing, aflame, ablaze; inflamed; heated, excited, glowing, aglow │ ملتھب قطن (quṭn) guncotton
الھوت look up alphabetically
لھث lahata a (laht, لھاث luhāt) to loll one’s tongue with thirst or fatigue; to pant, gasp, be out of breath; to breathe heavily
لھاث luhāt panting, pant, gasp │ لھاث الموت l. al-maut death rattle, agony of death
لھثان lahtān f. لھثى lahtā panting, gasping, out of breath; thirsty
لھج lahija a (lahaj) to be devoted, dedicated (ب to s.th.), be attached (ب to s.o., to s.th.), be very fond (ب of), be in love (ب with); to be bent. be intent, be keen (ب on), be eager (ب for), be mad (ب about, after); to do (ب s.th.) constantly or fervently│ لھج عليه بالثناء (tanā’) to extol s.o. fervently; لھج بذكره (bidikrihī) to speak constantly of s.o., mention s.o.’s name continually with praise; بشكره لھج (bi-šukrihī) to launch  forth into profuse thanks or praises; لھج بالضراعة (ḍarā‘a) to resort to humble pleas IV causative: بالشكر لسانه الھج (lisānahū, šukr) to elicit profuse thanks from s.o. XI الھاج ilhājja to curdle, coagulate (milk)
لھجة lahja tip of the tongue; tongue; manner of speaking; tone; dialect, vernacular; language │ العاتب بلھجة in a reproachful tone, reproachingly; اللھجة شديد in violent language, sharply worded
لھج luhja appetizer, hors d’oeuvre
 لھد lahada a (lahd) to overburden, over-exert (ه s.o.)
لھذم lahdam sharp, pointed
لھط lahaṭa a (lahṯ) to slap
لھف lahafa a (lahaf) to sigh (على for s.th. lost); to regret, deplore, lament (على s.th.); to grieve (على for), fret, worry (على shout) V do.; to be eager, yearn (على for, also ل), pant (على after, also ل)
لھف lahf regret, grief, sorrow │ لھف يا  yā lahfa and لھفا يا yā lahfā oh, what a pity! too bad! alas! لھف يا (with foll. genit. of pers.) oh, how unfortunate he is! لھفي يا عليك (lahfī) oh, how sorry I feel for you!
لھفة lahfa sigh, lament; anxiety, apprehension, concern, worry, sorrow, grief; yearning, longing, hankering, desire, impatience
لھفان lahfān  f. لھفى lahfā, pl. لھافى lahāfā, لھف luhuf sighing; regretful; sad, sorry, worried, sorrowful, grieved; longing, yearning
لھيف lahīf pl. لھاف lihāf regretful, sorry, sad, worried, sorrowful, grieved
الھف lāhif worried, troubled, sorrowful, grieved, full of regret
ملھوف malhūf worried, troubled, depressed; apprehensive, concerned, anxious; 880 covetous, eager (الى or على for), desirous (الى or على of); longing. yearning
متلھف mutalahhif yearning, longing, hankering; anxious, eager, impatient
لھق lahiqa a to be snow-white
لھلق lahlaqa to loll one’s tongue with thirst
لھم lahima a (lahm, laham), V and VIII to devour, gobble, swallow up (ه s.th.); to consume, destroy (ه s.th.; fire) IV to make (ه s.o,) swallow (ه s.th.); to inspire (ھ ه s.o, with) X to ask (ه s.o.) for inspiration or advice; to seek to find out (ھ s.th.), try to get (ھ s.th.); to pray, turn (ھ ه to God for)
لھم lahim and لھوم lahūm greedy, covetous, voracious, gluttonous
الھام ilhām pl. -āt inspiration; instinct
ملھم mulham inspired
(لھو and لھا (لھي lahā u (lahw) to amuse o.s., distract o.s., divert o.s., pass or kill time ( ب with s.th,); to play, toy, dally, trifle; to fritter away, trifle away, prattle away (بوقته bi-waqtihī one’s time); to enjoy o.s., have fun, have a good time; to delight, take pleasure (الى or ب in); to enjoy, savor, relish (ب s.th.); -- (لھي luhiy, لھيان lihyān) to turn one’s attention (عن from); to try to forget, forget, give up, renounce (عن s.th.), become oblivious (عن of); -- لھي lahiya a ( لھا lahan) to like, love (ب s.th.), be very fond (ب of), be in love, be infatuated (ب with), be mad (ب about, after); to turn one’s attention (عن from), become oblivious (عن of), forget, give up, renounce (عن s.th,); to pay no attention ( عن to), be heedless (عن of) II to delight, amuse, divert, distract (ه ب s.o. with), divert s.o.’s (ه) attention (عن from), make ( عن s.o.) oblivious (عن of); to keep, divert ( عن s.o. from), take s.o.’s (ه) mind away ( عن from) III to approach, be near (ه s.o.) IV = II; V and VI to amuse o.s., pass the time (ب with s.th,), take pleasure, delight ( ب in); to seek distraction (عن ب in s.th. from) VIII do.: to play, toy, trifle (ب with s.th.)
لھو lahw amusement, entertainment, diversion, distraction, passtime, pleasure, sport, fun, play │ اللھو دور dūr al-l. and اللھو اماكن places of entertainment. amusement centers
لھاة lahāh pl. لھوات lahawāt, لھيات lahayāt, لھي luhiya, lihīy, لھا lahan, لھاء lahā’ uvula
لھوى lahawī velar (adj.) اللھويتان الحرفان al-ḥarfān al-lahawīyatān the velars q and k
ملھاة malhāh object of delight; comedy
│ عامية ملھاة (‘āmmīya) popular farce
ملھى malhan pl. ماله malāhin place of entertainment, amusement center; amusement, entertainment, fun, diversion, distraction │ المالھي ضريبة admissions tax, entertainment tax
ملھى milhan pl. ماله malāhin plaything toy; pl. musical instruments, also آالت المالھي
 تلھية talhiya distraction, diversion, amusement
اله lāhin (with عن) heedless, inattentive, inadvertent, oblivious, forgetful
مله mulhin amusing, entertaining, diverting, pleasant
لو lau (conj.) if (as a rule, introducing hypothetical conditional clauuses) │ ان لو lau anna (introducing nominal clauses) if; لوال laulā if not; لوالنا if it weren’t (hadn’t been) for us; لو فيما fī-mā lau in case that; ولو wa-lau although, though; even if; (optative particle) if only ...! would
that ...! I wish ...! يعلم لو I wish he knew! if he only knew! 881
لوبيا lūbiyā bean (bot.) │ بلدي لوبيا(baladī) (eg.) cowpea (Vigna Binenais Endl.; bot.); لوبيا عافن (eg.) hyacinth bean, lablab (Dolichos lablab L.; bot.)
لوبيا lūbyā Libya
لوبي lūbī Libyan
manāṣin hīnu l. الت حين مناص (lāta: )الت )لوت 
it’s too late to escape
 لوت lūt (eg.) maigre (Sciaena aquila)
لوث) الث) lāta u (laut) and II to stain, tarnish, soil, sully (ھ s.th.); -- lawita a (lawat) to be dilatory, tardy, slow; to hesitate, tarry, linger V to be or get stained, blotted, tarnished, soiled, sullied (ب with) VIII to be dilatory, tardy, slow; to be obscure, confused, complicated (على for s.o.)
لوثة lauta stain, blot, spot
لوثة lūta languor, lassitude, fatigue, faintness; passion, weakness (في for, also with foll. genit.: for) │لوثة (به) فيه he is a little crazy, he has a bee in his bonnet
ملوث mulawat stained, blotted, tarnished, soiled, sullied, unclean; stricken with cholera, pestilence, etc.
ملتاث multāt mentally confused
لوج (Fr. loge) lōj pl. -āt, الواج alwāj (theater) box, loge; (masonic, etc.) lodge
لوح) الح) lāḥa u (lauḥ) to appear, show, loom, emerge, come in sight; to become visible ( ل to s.o.); to break, begin to show (dawn); to shine, gleam, glint, flash, shimmer, glimmer, sparkle; to seem, appear; to
wither, singe, parch, scorch; to tan (ه s.o.; sun) │ان لي يلوح it seems to me that ...; على يلوح ما as it seems, apparently II to make a sign, beckon, wave (ل ب or الى to s.o. with); to signal; to allude (ب to), hint (ب at), intimate, insinuate (ل ب to s.o. s.th.), give (ل ب s.o. s.th.) to understand; to flourish, brandish, swing, wave (ب s.th.); to turn grey (ھ the head; of old age); to burn, tan (ه s.o.; sun); to plank, lay with planks (ھ the floor) │بيديه لوح (biyadaihi) to wave with the hands IV to appear, show, come in sight; to shimmer, glimmer, glint, flash, sparkle; to wave, brandish, flourish, swing (ھ s.th.)
لوح lauḥ pl. الواح alwāḥ, alwāḥ board, blackboard; slate; tablet; slab; plate, sheet; pane; plank, board; panel; small board, signboard; shoulder blade, scapula │لوح اردواز (arduwāz) slab of slate, slate; O لوح مجعد (muja‘‘ad) corrugated iron; الجليد لوح block of ice; حديد لوح sheet iron; زجاج لوح zujāj sheet of glass, pane; O متحرك لوح (mutaḥarrik) spring-board (in sports); لوح معدني (ma‘dinī) metal plate, metal sheet; النافذة لوح windowpane
لوحة lauḥa pl. -āt, الواح alwāḥ board; blackboard; slate; tablet; slab; plate, sheet; pane; panel; plaque; plane, surface; screen; placard, poster; picture, painting │ االسم لوحة l. al-ism doorplate, name plate; التوزيع لوحة switchboard (el., tel.); الداما لوحة checkerboard; زيتية لوحة (zaitīya) oil painting; سوداء لوحة (saudā’) blackboard; bulletin board; الشطرنج لوحة l. aš-šaṭranj chessboard; الكتابة لوحة slate; writing tablet; blackboard
لواح lawwāḥ withering, singeing, parching, scorching
لوح talwīḥ pl. -āt beckoning, waving, flourishing, brandishing; sign, signal, wink, wave; allusion; hint, intimation, insinuation; metonymy; pl. hints, references; remarks, annotations, marginal notes
الئحة lā’iḥa pl. -āt  لوائح lawā’iḥ  program, project; bill, motion (esp., in parliament); order, decree, edict; ordinance; regulation, rule; pl.  لوائح outward appearance, looks, outward sign│882 القانون الئحة قانونية، الئحة bill, draft
 law; السفر الئحة l. as-safar timetable, train schedule, railroad guide; الطعام الئحة l. aṯ- ṯa‘ām (syr.) menu, bill of fare
ملوحة mulawwiḥa signal, semaphore (railroad)
ملتاح multāḥ sun-tanned, sunburned (لوذ) lāda u (laud, لواذ liwād, lawād, luwād, لياذ
liyād) to take refuge, seek shelter (ب with s.o., in s.th.), have recourse, resort (ب to); to keep close (ب to), observe religiously ( ب s.th.)
مالذ malād refuge, protection; shelter; asylum, sanctuary; protector
الئذ lā’id one seeking shelter or protection, refugee
لذع see لوذعي and لوذع lyre lūr لور
لورد (Engl.) lord pl. -āt lord
لورى (Engl.) lorry, truck
لوز II to stuff with almonds (ھ s.th.); (eg.) to form bolls (cotton)
لوز lauz almond(s) (coll.), (eg.) patch (on a shoe) │ القطن لوز l. al-quṭn cotton bolls; اللوز دودة dūdat al-l. boll weevil
لوزة lauza pl. -āt almond; اللوزتان the tonsils (anat.) │ اللوزتين التھاب ilt. al- lauzatain tonsillitis
لوزى lauzī almond-shaped, almond (adj.)
لوس) الس) lāsa u (laus) to taste
لوص) الت) lāṣa u (lauṣ) to peep, peer, pry (through a chink in the door, or the like) III do. (ه for s.o.); to stare, gaze (ھ or الى at s.th.), to look firmly, unflinchingly (ھ or الى at s.th.); to dupe, cheat, deceive (ه s.o.)
مالوص mulāwiṣ sly, cunning, wily
لوط) الط) lāṯa u (lauṯ) to stick, cling, adhere
( to); to coat with clay, to plaster ( a wall)
لوط lūṯ Lot (Biblical name)
لوط lūṭī sodomite, pederast
لواط liwāṭ and لواطة liwāṭa sodomy, pederasty
لوع) الع) lā‘a u (lau‘) to he or heoome restive, impatient; to become ill j to seize
vehemently, overwhelm, torment, make sick (ه s.o.; love); to tan (ه s.o.; sun) II to torture, torment, agonize VIII to be burning, inflamed, languishing (with love, longing); to feel burning anxiety (على for s.o.)
لوعة lau‘a ardor of love, amorous rapture, lovesickness; pain, grief, anguish, anxiety, torment, torture, agony
التياع iltiyā‘ burning, enrapturedness, burning anxiety. anguish; agony, pain, suffering
مالوع mulāwi‘ cunning, artful, wily, crafty, sly
logarithms lūgāritmāt لوغاريتمات
 لوف) الف) lāfa u (lauf) to eat, chew (ھ s.th.)
 لوف lūf luffa, dishcloth gourd (Luffa cylindrical Roem; bot.)
ملوق milwaq pl. مالوق malāwiq  spatula
 لوك) الك) lāka u (lauk) to chew (ھ s.th.); to talk constantly about s.th. (ھ), to bring into discredit (سمعته sum‘atahū s.o.’s reputation) │الكالم الك (kalām) to be inhibited in one’s speech, stammer, express o.s. imperfectly, تلوكه الذي السؤال األلسنة (alsina) the question which is on everyone’s lips; األلسن تلوكه ما (alsun) what people say, what is generally rumored 883
 الئكي and الئكية look up alphabetically
لوكانده (It. locanda) and لوكنده lōkanda pl. -āt
inn; hotel
لولب laulab pl. لوالب lawālib  screw; spiral; spiral spring, coil spring, extension spring; spring; axle; (fig.) mainspring, pivot point
لولبي laulabī screw-shaped; spiral, helical │ O زھرية لولبيات (zuharīya) spiroohetes, syphilogenous bacteria; درج لولبي (daraj) spiral staircase
 لمس) الم) lāma u (laum, مالم malām, مالمة malāma) to blame, censure, rebuke, chide, scold, reproach (في or ه على s.o. for) II to censure sharply, reprove, reprimand (ه s.o.) IV = I; V to blame o.s. ; to tarry, linger, take one'. time (في or على in or with s.th.), procrastinate, temporize, hedge VI to blame each other VIII to be censured, he blamed X to deserve blame, be blameworthy, reprehensible
 لوم laum and لومة lauma censure, rebuke, reproof, blame, reproach
لومة luwama and لوام lawwām severe censurer, stem critic; censorious
مالم malām and مالمة malāma pl. مالوم malāwim  censure, rebuke, reproof, blame, reproach
تلويم talwīm censure, rebuke, reproof
lawwām, لوام luwwam, لوم pl. lā’im الئم
ليم luyyam censurer, critic, accuser
الئمة lā’ima pl. لوائم lawā’im  censure, rebuke, reproof, blame, reproach
ملوم malūm, مليم malīm and مالم mulām censured, blamed; blameworthy, reprehensible
لومان lūmān penitentiary, penal servitude
لومانجي lūmānjī convict, inmate of a penitentiary
لون II to variegate, dapple, make colorful (ھ s.th.); to color, tint, tinge, paint, daub (ھ s.th.); to make up, rouge (ھ the face, etc.) V to be colored or tinted; to color, change color, become discolored; to he colorful, variegated; to be fickle
لون laun pl. الوان alwān color; coloring, tint, tinge, hue, shade; complexion; kind, sort, specimen, species; dish, course; pl. (with foll. genit.) all kinds of │ األطعمة الوان
a. al-aṭ‘ima all kinds of food; األلوان مختلف muktalif al-a. variegated, multicolored, motley, varied, various; الوانه جلى jallā alwānahu to bring out the different aspects of s.th., point up s.th., make s.th. stand out
لوني launī colorful, colored, color- (in compounds), chromatic
تلوين talwīn coloring
ملون mulawwan colored, tinted, colorful, many-colored, variegated, kaleidoscopic
متلون mutalawwin colored, tinted; many-colored, multicolored; iridescent, opalescent, scintillating; changeable, inconstant, unsteady; whimsical, capricious, fickle
لونجي (eg.) lawingī and الونجي lāwingī attendant, bath attendant
لونجية lawingīya housekeeper, woman attendant, servant, housemaid
ماء اللوندا │ lavender lawandā lavanda) (It. لوندا
lavender water
لوى lawā i (لي layy, لوي lawīy) to turn (ھ s.th.); to crook, curve (ھ s.th.); to bend, flex, bend up, down, back or over (ھ s.th.); to twist, contort, wrench, warp (ھ s.th.); to distort, pervert (ھ s.th.); to turn (ھ the head), turn away, avert (ھ the face); to turn around, turn (على to s.o., to s.th.), face (على s.o., s.th.); to 884 think back (على on), recall (على s.th.); to care, bother (على about), pay attention or heed (على to) │ اللسان فيه لوى (lisān) to speak ill of s.o., backbite s.o.; شيء على يلوي ال not to care about anything, be utterly reckless; -- (لي layy, ليان layyān) to conceal, keep secret ( ھ عن s.th. from s.o.); -- lawiya a (لوى lawan) to be crooked, curved, bent; to writhe, twist; to wind, coil II to bend, bow, incline, tilt, twist, wrench, contort, turn, crook, curve (ھ s.th.); to pervert, distort, complicate (ھ s.th.) IV to turn, twist, bend, crook, curve (ب or ھ s.th.); to avert (ھ عن s.th. from); to wave (بيده bi- yadihī one’s hand); to hoist (ھ a flag); to take away, put away, remove (ب s.th.) │ الشيء عنان الوى to avert, prevent, restrain s.th. (عن from), check, curb s.th. V to be twisted, winding, tortuous, sinuous, bent, crooked; to be turned, be twisted; to turn, twist, wind, meander, coil; to writhe, wriggle, squirm; to display shrewdness and cunning VIII to be curved, crooked, bent; to be turned, be twisted; to twist, warp, get contorted, get bent out of shape; to turn off, turn away; to turn one’s back (or on s.th.); to be or become difficult, involved, intricate, complicated (على for s.o.)
لي layy bending, twist(ing), turn(ing) │ الشيشة لي (eg.) the flexible tube of the narghile; اللي من الحي يعرف ال (ya‘rifu l- ḥayya) he doesn’t know enough to come in out of the rain, he wouldn't know a snake from a garden hose
لية Iayya pl. لوى liwan bend, fold, flexure, twist, tortuosity, sinuosity, turn, curve
 لوى lawan pl. الواء alwā’ gripes, colic; agony, pain, hardship │ والألواء األلواء قاسى (la’wā’) to die a thousand deaths
alwiya الوية alwā’, الواء pl. liwan لوى
curvature
لواء liwā’ pl. الوية alwiya, الويات alwiyāt banner, flag, standard; brigade (mil.; U.A.R., Leb., Ir.); major general (mil.; U.A.R.); rear admiral (Eg.); province, district (Ir.; the country is subdivided into 14 اللواء امير │ لواء brigadier general (Ir.); جوي لواء (jawwī) air-force brigade; لواء عقد شيء (liwā’a š.) to found, start, originate, produce, cause, arouse, provoke s.th.; لألميرال لواؤھا المعقود البارحة ... (liwā’uhā) the admiral’s flagship ...; النصر) المجد لواء له عقد) ‘uqida lahū l. ul-majd (un-naṣr) approx.: he was awarded the laurel of fame (of victory)
لواء lawwā’ wryneck (zool.)
ملوى milwan pl. مالو malāwin spanner, wrench; O peg (of stringed instruments)
التواء iltiwā’ curvedness, curvature; bend, twist, tortuosity, sinuosity, curve; crookedness, wryness; perverseness, absurdity │ األرض التواء ilt. al-arḍ unevenness of the terrain
التواءة iltiwā’a (n. vic.) pl. -āt a bending, flexing, twist (e.g., of the body in dancing)
الو lāwin pl. لواة luwāh turning, twisting
│ على الو غير reckless of, without regard for
ملوي malwī crooked, curved, bent; twisted, warped, contorted; winding, meandering, tortuous, sinuous; perverted, wrong, absurd
ملوى = multawin ملتو
ملتوى multawan pl. -āt turn (of the road), curve; curvature
لوى see لية and لي 
 لياء liyyā’ mackerel shark, porbeagle (zool.)
ليبريا lībaryā Liberia 885
ليبيا lībiyā Libya; ليبي lībī Libyan
ليت laita and ليت يا yā laita (particle, with foll. noun in acc. or personal suffix) would God! if only ...! │ ألجلك مت ليتني laitanī
muttu li-ajlika would God I had died for you! ھنا كان ليته I wish he were here! if only he were here! يذھب كان ليت يا (yadhabu) I wish he had gone! شعري ليت (ši‘rī) I wish I knew ...!
ليترجية līturjīya pl. -āt liturgy
ليتوانيا lītuwānīya Lithuania
ليتواني lītuwānī Lithuanian
ليث lait pl. ليوث luyūt lion
لوذ see لياذ
ليرا līrā and ليرة līra pl. -āt pound (as a monetary unit) │ انكليزية ليرة (ingilīzīya) pound sterling
 ليس laisa (without imperf.) not to be (with ب or acc. s.th. or s.o.); not to exist; (= intensified ال) not │ اال ليس (illā) terminating a sentence: only, and no more, and nothing else; سوى – ليس (siwā) nothing but, only, merely; الحقيقة من شيء على ليس there is not a grain of truth in it; فقط – ليس بل -- (faqaṭ, bal) not only -- but also; ل ليس not to have, not to possess; شيء لنا ليس we don’t have anything; ان له ليس he has no right to ..., he mustn’t ...; من ليس not to belong to …, have nothing to do with ...; كذلك اليس a-laisa ka-dālik? Isn’t it so?; (with ب and participle) to be unable to, بفاعل لست lastu bi-fā‘ilin I can’t do it
 ليس layisa a (layas) to be valiant, brave, courageous
līs ليس pl. laisā’ , ليساء f. alyas , اليس
valiant, brave, courageous
ليسانس (Fr. licence) līsans the academic degree of a licentiate
ليف II to rub with palm fibers (ھ s.th.) V to form fibers, become fibrous
ليف līf (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. الياف alyāf fibers, fibrils, bast │ ھندي ليف (hindī) coco fibers, coir; الكتان اليف a. al-kattān flax fibers
ليفة līfa (n. un.) fiber, fibril; tuft of palm fibers used as a brush │ االستحمام ليفة bath ھsponge, luffa
ليفي līfī and ليفاني līfānī fibered, fibrous
تليف talayyuf fibration, fibrillation; cirrhosis (med.)
 (الق (ليق lāqa i (laiq) to befit, become (ب s.o.), be proper, seemly (ب for s.o.), be suitable (ب to s.o.), be worthy (ب of s.o.); to be suited, appropriate, fit (ب for s.th.); to fit (garment)
ليقة līqa pl. ليق liyaq tuft of cotton or silk threads which is inserted in an inkwell; putty; clay; mortar
لياقة liyāqa propriety, seemliness, suitableness; decorum, decency; capability, skill; efficiency, competence; worthiness, merit, desert; correct behavior, blameless conduct, good manners │ باللياقة مخل (mukill improper, unseemly, unbecoming
اليق alyaq  more suitable, more appropriate, more proper, fitter (ب for)
الئق lā’iq suitable, appropriate, proper, befitting, becoming, seemly; suited, adapted, fit; worthy, deserving
ليل lail (usually m.) nighttime, night (as opposed to نھار daytime); pl. □ ليالي layālī (syr.) a certain vocal style; ليال lailan at night │ نھار ليل laila nahāra day and night
ليلة laila pl. -āt, ليال layālin, ليائل layā’il  night (u opposed to يوم); evening; soirée; الليلة al-lailata tonight I 886 وضحاھا ليلة بين (wa-ḍuḥāhā) overnight; امس ليلة lailata amsi last night; yesterday evening; ليلة خيرية kairīya) charity soirée, benefit performance; الدخلة ليلة l. ad-dukla wedding night; راقصة ليلة soirée dansante, evening dance; زھرةا ليلة glamorous evening party; شادية ليلة (šādiya) soirée of vocal music; ليلة ليالء (lailā’ ) dark night; ليالء ليلة في in the dark of night, under cover of the night; ليلة القدر l. al-qadr or القضاء ليلة l. al-qaḍā’ the night in which, according to sura 97, the Koran was revealed, celebrated between the 26  and 27  of Ramadan; المعراج ليلة l. al-mi‘rāj the night of the 27  of Rajab in which the Prophet made his journey through the seven heavens; شعبان نصف ليلة
l.	niṣf aš-ša‘bān the night between the 14  and 16  of Shaban, when, according to popular belief, the heavenly tree of life is shaken, shedding the leaves of those who will die next year; النقطة ليلة l. an-nuqṭa the night of June 17  (the 11  day of the Coptic month Ba’ūna) when, according to popular belief, a miraculous drop falls
from heaven, thus causing the annual rise of the Nile
ليلتئذ lailata’idin (in) that night; (on) that evening
ليلي lailī nocturnal, nightly; of night, night- (in compounds); evening (adj.)
ليلى lailā a woman’s name │ يبكي كل لياله على (يغني) kullun yabkī (yugannī) ‘alā lailāhu everyone sings his own tune, does as he pleases, follows his own fancy; كل بلياله وصال يدعي (yadda‘ī waṣlan) everybody claims to be the chosen one, every-one brags in his own way
ليلة see ليالء
ليلك (Engl.) lailak lilac
ليمان līmān pl. -āt harbor, port; penitentiary
│ lemon -āt pl. )ة un. (n. līmūn laimūn, ليمون al-l. šarāb شراب الليمون lime; ليمون حامض lemonade
 لين) الن) lāna i (līn, ليان layān) to be or become soft, tender, gentle, mild, pliable, flexible, supple; to yield, give way; to soften, relent, calm down; to become milder, friendlier │ يلين ال inflexible, unbending; قناته النت (qanātuhū) to show o.s. compliant, yield, relent, give in II and IV to soften, relax, (ھ s.th.); to placate, soothe, allay, mitigate, assuage, temper, moderate (ھ s.th.) ill to be gentle, kind, friendly (ه to s.o.); to treat with kindness and leniency (ه s.o.)
لين līn softness; tenderness; tender treatment; gentleness; flexibility, pliableness, suppleness; yieldingness, compliance, tractability; pliancy, smoothness, diarrhea │ العظام لين softening of the bones, osteomalicia (med.); القيادة لين tractability, docility; اللين حروف the “soft” letters ي و، ا،
لين layyin pl. -ūn, اليناء alyinā’  and lain pl. -ūn soft; flabby, feeble; tender; gentle; flexible, pliable, yielding; pliant, supple, resilient, elastic, tractable │ العريكة لين l. al-‘arīka mild-mannered, gentle-hearted; القياد لين tractable, manageable, docile, obedient; لين بطنه (baṭnuhū) he suffers from diarrhea
ليونة luyūna softness; tenderness; gentleness; flexibility, pliability,
 suppleness │ الجانب ليونة sociability, companionableness, compliance, yieldingness, tractability
مالينة mulāyana friendliness, kindness
ملين mulayyin softening, emollient; dissolvent, diluent; aperient, cathartic, laxative; ملينات laxatives
لوى ٧٨٨ seeليان  



م
Ltd. Inc., )ش . م . م . =) شركة مسئولية محدودة
م ma for ما what? after prepositions: م الى ilā ma whereto? Where? which way? whither? بم bi-ma with what? Wherewith? لم li-ma why? wherefore? م حتى ḥattā ma how far? to which point?
ما mā 1. (interrogative pronoun) what │ لما li- mā why? wherefore? for what reason? ماذا mā-dā what (on earth)? لماذا li-mādā why (on earth)? لك ما what’s the matter with you? what is it? لك ما لي، ما etc., (with foll. verb) why? wherefore? what ... for? why should I, should you, etc.? وذاك انت ما mā anta wa-dāka what’s that to you? what has this to do with you? what do you know about that? اجمله ما mā ajmalahū how handsome he is! عمر افضل ما mā afḍala ‘umara! how excellent Omar is! --
2. (relative pronoun) that which, what; something which; whatever, all that ... │ ﷲ شاء ما see ما كثيرا شاء؛ katīran mā not seldom, as often as not, very often; فيه بما bi-mā fīhi including ..., ... inclusive; كان ما المعاھدة امضاء من (imḍā’i l-mu’āhada) the fact that the agreement has been signed, the agreement having been signed; -- 3. (indefinite pronoun) foll. an indefinite noun: some, a certain │ ما ألمر li-amrin mā because of something or other, for some reason or other; ما يوما yauman mā some day, sometime in the future; -- 4. (negation) not │ ان ما (in) not (intensified); حتى -- ان ما mā an – ḥattā no sooner had he ... than ..., he had hardly … when ...; ان اال ھي وما wa-mā hiya illā an or ان اال ھو وما (with foll. verb in perfect)
before long he ..., presently ...; then, thereupon; حتى -- ان اال ھي وما wa-mā hiva illā an – ḥattā no sooner had he ... than he had hardly when ...; -- 5. (conjunction) as long as │ حيا دمت ما mā dumtu ḥayyan as long I live; لم ما mā lam so long as ... not, unless; -- 6. whenever; as far as, to the extent or degree that │ الفرص واتتني ما (wātatnī l-furaṣ) (whenever opportunities came my way, i.e.) whenever I had a chance
بين ما mā-bain antechamber, anteroom (of the Turkish Sultan); chief chamber- lain’s office (in Ottoman Turkey)
موه see مائي and ماء
ماتينيه (Fr. matinée) mātīnēh matinee
جري see ماجريات
ماجستير mājistēr master, schoolmaster
ماخور mākūr pl. مواخير mawākīr  house of ill repute, brothel
مار mār Mar, lord (Chr., preceding the names of saints), saint
مارس mars March (month) مارستان māristān lunatic asylum مارش marš march (mus.)
مارشال mārišāl marshal, field marshal │ مارشال جوي (jawwī) air marshal (formerly, a rank reserved exclusively for the King; Eg.)
مارشالية mārišālīya marshalcy, rank or position of a marshal
مارك mark pl. -āt mark (monetary unit)
ماركسي marksī Marxist
ماركسية marksīya Marxism
ماركة marka pl. -āt mark, sign, token │ تجارية ماركة (tijārīya) trade-mark 888
ماروني mārūnī pl. موارنة mawārina Maronite (adj. and n.)
مازوت māzūt mazut (residue in oil distillation, used as a fuel), heavy oil
diamond )الماس (for māsa ماسة and mās ماس
ماسي māsī diamond (used attributively)
ماسورة māsūra pl. مواسير mawāsīr  pipe, tube; hose; pipestem; water pipe, water main;
 gun barrel; conduit, conduit pipe; pipeline (esp., for oil)
ماسون (Fr. maçon) māsōn Freemason
ماسوني māsōnī freemasonic, masonic
ماسونية māsōnīya Freemasonry
ماشك māšik pl. مواشك mawāšik  tongs, fire tongs
مئق ma’iqa a (مأق ma’aq) to sob
مأق ma’q pl. مآق ma’āqin inner corner of the eye
مأقة ma’qa sobbing, sob
موق mūq pl. آماق āmāq inner corner of the eye
ماكياج (Fr. maquillage) mākiyāiii face painting, make-up
ماكينة mākīna pl. -āt, مكائن makā’in  machine
مالطة malṭa Malta
مالطي malṭī Maltese (adj. and n.)
mālīkōliyā ماليخاليا or mālinkōliyā مالنخوليا
melancholia
مأمأ ma’ma’a to bleat (sheep)
مأن ma’ana a (ma’n) to sustain, supply with provisions, provision, victual (ه s.o.)
مأنة ma’na pl. ma’anāt, مؤون mu’ūn
navel, umbilicus; umbilical region
مؤنة mu’na and مؤونة ma’ūna pl. مؤن mu’an provisions, food.; store, stock; supply; burden, encumbrance, inconvenience; trouble, pains, effort │ مؤن حربية (ḥarbīya) war material
below مائة see مئني
مانجو mangō mango, mango tree (bot.)
مانجوست mangost mongoose, ichneumon (zool.)
المانش (Fr. la Manche) al-mānš the English Channel
مانوليا mānūliyā magnolia (bot.)
مانوي mānawī Manichaean
مانوية mānawīya Manichaeism, doctrines of Manes
مانيفاتورة mānīfātūra manufactured goods, dry goods, textiles
مانيفستو mānīfistō manifest, list of a ship’s cargo
-āt pl. mānūkān) مانوكان (also mānīkān, مانيكان
mannequin, fashion model
ماھية māhīya pl. -āt quality, quiddity, essence, nature; salary, income; pay (mil.)
مايسترو (It. maestro) māyistrō maestro, conductor
mi’āt مئات mi’ūn, مئون pl. mi’a مئة or مائة
cent per في المائة │ hundred
مئوي mi’awī and مئيني mi’īnī centesimal, centigrade; percentile, percentual │ عيد مئوي (‘īd) 100  anniversary, centennial; مئوية نسبة or مئينية نسبة (nisba) percentage; مئوية درجة (daraja) centigrade (thermometer)
 مايو māyū May
 مايو (Fr. maillot) māyō and مايوه māyōh tights
مت matta u (matt) to spread, extend, stretch (ھ s.th.); to seek to establish a link (الى to s.o., ب by marriage), enter into relations (الى with); to be related, become 889 related by marriage (الى to), marry into the family of (الى); to belong (الى to); to be associated, be connected (الى with) │ الى بصلة (bi- ṣilatin) to have close ties with s.o., be related (by marriage) to s.o.; to be connected with s.th., have to do with s.th.; الصلة باقرب له مت (bi-aqrabi ṣ-ṣila) to be most intimately connected with s.o.
ماتة mātta close ties; family ties, kinship
متح mataḥa a (matḥ) to draw from a well (ھ water)
متر mitr pl. امتار amtār meter (measure of length)
متري mitrī metric(al)
متراليوز (Ft. mitrailleuse) mitrāliyōz machine gun
متع mata‘a a (mat‘, متعة mut‘a) to carry away, take away (ب s.th.); -- (متوع mutū‘) to be strong, firm, solid │ النھار متع (nahār) it was broad daylight, the sun was high II to make (ه s.o.) enjoy (ب s.th.); to furnish, equip, supply (ه ب s.o. with); to give as compensation (ھا ھ to a divorced woman s.th.) │ ﷲ متعه God grant him enjoyment throughout his life; البصر متع (baṣara) to
 gratify the eye IV to make (ه s.o.) enjoy ( ب s.th.); to have the usufruct (ب of s.th.) V and X to enjoy, savor, relish (ب s.th.)
متعة mut‘a pl. متع muta‘ enjoyment, pleasure, delight, gratification; recreation; compensation paid to a divorced woman (Isl. Law); (also المتعة نكاح) muta, temporary marriage. usufruct marriage contracted for a specified time and exclusively for the purpose of sexual pleasure (Isl. Law) │ المتعة اماكن recreation centers
متاع matā‘ pl. امتعة amti‘a enjoyment, pleasure, delight, gratification; object of delight; necessities of life; chattel, possession, property; goods, wares, commodities, merchandise; furniture; implements, utensils, household effects; baggage, luggage, equipment, gear; useful article, article of everyday use; things, objects, stuff, odds and ends │ العين متاع m. al-‘ain delight of the eyes; المتاع سقط saqaṭ al-m. scrap, waste, discard, refuse; األمتعة الشخصية (šakṣīya) personal belongings; متاع المرأة m. al-mar’a cunnus (anat.)
امتع amta‘ more enjoyable, more delightful; recreative, recreational
امتاع imtā‘ pleasure, delight, gratification (which s.th. affords)
تمتع tamattu‘ enjoyment │ تمتع اسھم ashum t. participating certificates, shares entitling the bolder to participation in the net profit without the right to vote
استمتاع istimtā‘ enjoyment; love of pleasure, epicureanism
ماتع māti‘ long
ممتع mumatti‘ pleasant, delicious, enjoyable, delightful, gratifying
ممتع mumatta‘ enjoying (ب s.th.), in position (ب of)
ممتع mumti‘ pleasant, delicious, enjoyable, delightful, gratifying; interesting
متن matuna u (متانة matāna) to be firm, strong, solid II to make firm or strong (ھ s.th.); to strengthen, consolidate, fortify (ھ s.th.)
متن matn pl. متون mutūn, متان mitān half, or side, of the back; back (esp., of
animals, but also fig.); main thing, main part; body (e.g., of a document or journal, aside from footnotes, annotations, etc.), text (of a tradition, as distinguished from the isnād; of a book, as distinguished from the commentary; also, in general, linguistic or literary text); middle of the road, roadway, pavement; surface; desk of a ship │ متن على aboard (a ship or airplane); 890 البحر متن على (m. il-baḥr) by sea, sea-borne; الھواء متن على (m. il-hawā’) through the air, air-borne
متن matn and متن firm, strong, solid
متانة matāna firmness, strength, solidity, hardiness; will power, strength of will, determination, backbone, firmness of character, fortitude; succinctness, conciseness of style
تمتين tamtīn strengthening, consolidation
متى matā s. (interrogative particle) when? at what time? │ متى الى and متى حتى till when? how long? -- 2. (conjunction) when, whenever │ ما متى whenever
مثاث matāt cream, cosmetic
مثل matala u (مثول mutūl) to resemble (ه s.o.), be or look like s.o. (ه), boar a likeness (ه to); to imitate, copy (ه s.o.); to compare, liken (ه ب s.o. to); to represent, mean, signify (ھ s.th.), stand for (ھ); to stand erect (يديه بين baina yadaihī before s.o. in audience), appear before s.o.; to present
o.s. to s.o.; to present itself to the eye, be on view; to plant o.s., stand; to step forth, come forward, enter, appear, make one’s appearance (esp. of an actor, on the stage)
│ الملك يدي بين مثل (b. yadayyi l-malik) to have an audience with the king, be received in audience by the king; -- u (matl) to maim, mutilate (ب s.o.); -- u (matl, مثلة mutla) to make an example (ب of s.o.); -- matula u (مثول mutūl) to stand, appear (يديه بين baina yadaihi before s.o. in audience) II to make (ھ s.th.) like s.th. else (ب), make (ھ s.th.) similar. analogous (ب to); to assimilate (biol.); to give or quote as an example (ل ب s.th. of, also ھ s.th. على of), exemplify (ب ل with s.th. s.th.), use as a simile (ھ ب s.th. for); to compare, liken (ه ,ھ ب s.o. s.th. to); to punish severely, treat harshly (ب s.o.); to
 maim, mutilate (ب s.o.); to represent pictorially or graphically, show (ه ,ھ s.o., s.th.), picture, depict, describe (ه ,ھ s.o., s.th.); to portray, paint (ه s.o.), sculpture a bust or statue (ه of s.o.); to represent (ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to act (on stage or screen), appear as an actor; to play, act (دورا dauran a part or role), star (دورا in a role); to stage, perform (ھ a play); to form, constitute (chem.) │ تمثيل اشنع به مثل (ašna‘ t.) to make a dreadful example of s.o., punish s.o. with utmost cruelty III to resemble (ه s.o., ھ s.th.), be or look like
s.o. or s.th. (ه ,ھ), be similar, bear a likeness (ه ,ھ to); to correspond, be analogous (ه ,ھ to s.o., to s.th.); to compare, liken (ه ب s.o. to) V to make o.s. similar, assimilate o.s. (ب to s.o.); to become similar (ب to), become like s.o. or s.th. (ب), follow (ب s.o. s.th.), take after
s.o. or s.th. (ب); to take on the shape of
s.o. (ب); to assimilate, absorb (ھ s.th.); to do likewise, imitate, copy (ب s.o., s.th.); to imagine, fancy (ب s.th., with ه and verb;
s.o. to do s.th.); to get an idea (ھ of); to give or quote as an example, use as a simile (ب s.th.); to quote, cite (ب a verse); to present itself, be represented, be visible, find visual expression (في in); to embody, personify, (im)personate, typify (ھ s.th.); to stand erect, appear (يديه بين baina yadaihi before s.o.) VI to resemble each other, be alike, go together, agree, match; to recover (من from) │ الشفاء الى or تماثل للشفاء (šifā’) to be on the way to recovery VIII to take as a model or an example, imitate, copy, follow (ھ s.th.); to submit, subject o.s. (ل to s.o., to s.th.); to obey (ھ an order)
مثل mitl pl. امثال amtāl s.th. similar, s.th. of the same kind; resemblance, similarity, similitude, likeness; image; equivalent; 891 (with foll. genit. or suffix) s.o. like ..., one like ...; s.th. like ...; مثل mitla (prep.) and كمثل ka-mitli similar to, like, just as; one like; s.th. like; the same as; (just) as much as │ مثله ھم hum mitluhū they are like him, they are of his kind; بالمثل in the same manner, likewise, equally, also, too; ما مثل mitla mā just as, as well as; ما بمثل
bi-mitl mā in the same manner as; المثل اجر ajr al-m. adequate payment or wages; عامله بالمثل (‘āmalahū) to repay s.o. like for like,
treat s.o. in like manner; بالمثل المعاملة مبدأ (mabda’ al-mu‘āmala) principle of reciprocity; بالمثل المثل مقابلة (muqābalat al- m.) retaliation, reprisal; امثاله amtāluhū people like him, people of his kind; امثال بكر ابي people like Abū Bakr; امثاله ثالثة الى up to three times as much
مثلما mitlamā (conj.) as
مثلي mitlī replaceable; fungible (Isl.
Law)
amtal امثل see mutlā مثلى
مثل matal pl. امثال amtāl likeness; metaphor, simile, parable; proverb, adage; example; lesson, similar case; ideal, model; مثال matalan for example, for instance, e.g. │ كمثل مثل he is comparable to ..., he is like ...; اعلى مثل (asmā) or مثل اعلى (a‘lā) ideal; األمثال ضرب see ضرب؛ السائرة األمثال proverbs; المثل رأي على (ra’yi l- m.) as the proverb says
مثال mitāl pl. امثلة amtila, مثل mutul s.th. equal; s.th. similar; simile, parable, allegory; example; pattern, standard; exemplary punishment; model; image, picture │ مثال على ... in the manner of ...; after the pattern or model of ...; اعلى مثال (a‘lā) pl. عليا مثل (‘ulyā) ideal; عالية مثل (‘āliya) ideals
مثالي mitālī parabolic; allegoric; typical, representative; model; exemplary; ideal │ النزعة مثال m. n-naz‘a idealist
مثال mattāl pl. -ūn sculptor
مثالة exemplariness, perfection, superiority; (pl. -āt, مثائل matā’il ) lesson, task, assignment
مثيل matīl pl. مثل mutul like, similar, analogous; equal, match │ مثيله f. مثيلتھا of his (its) kind, of her kind; له مثيل ال (matīla), مثيل له يسبق لم مثيل، له ليس (yasbiq) incomparable, matchless, unrivaled, unparalleled
مثول mutūl standing erect; appearance; presentation; audience
امثولة umtūla pl. -āt, اماثيل amātīl  example; deterrent example, warning, lesson; proverb; assignment, lesson
amātil  اماثل pl. mutlā, مثلى f. amtal , امثل
closer to perfection, coming nearer the
 ideal; ideal; model, exemplary, perfect │ ل المثلى السبيل the ideal way to ...
تمثال timtāl pl. تماثيل tamātīl  sculptured image; statue │ نصفي تمثال (niṣfī) bust
تمثيل tamtīl pl. تماثيل tamātīl  quotation of examples, exemplification; likening, comparison; assimilation; portrayal, picturing, depiction, description; representation; diplomatic representation; dramatic representation, acting, playing (of an actor); performance, show; dramatic art; exemplary punishment │ تجاري تمثيل (tijārī) commercial agency; فالن تمثيل (in motion-picture announcements) starring so-and-so; بدل التمثيل badal at-t. allowance for representation, allowance for professional expenditure, expense allowance; التمثيل دار theater, playhouse, opera house; التمثيل فن fann at-t. dramatic art, theater; sculpture; التمثيل سبيل على for the purpose of illustration
تمثيلي tamtīlī of or pertaining to the theater or stage, theatrical, histrionic; dramatic │ تمثيلي ملعب (mal‘ab) theater, playhouse
(ginā’īya) تمثيلية غنائية tamtīlīya: تمثيلية 892 opera
مماثلة mumātala resemblance, similarity, similitude, likeness, correspondence; analogy; exact equivalence (Isl. Law)
تمثل tamattul assimilation (biol.)
تماثل tamātul matching, agreement, correspondence, resemblance, similarity, similitude, likeness, recovery, convalescence
امتثال imtitāl obedience, compliance, consent
ماثل mātil standing, standing forth; placed, set down; displayed, on display; emerging, arising, cropping up, appearing, presenting itself │ عينيه امام ماثل (amāma ‘ainaihi) present before s.o.’s eyes; ماثل للعيان (li-l-‘iyān) visible, conspicuous, evident, obvious; حضرته في ماثل (ḥaḍratihī) in front of s.o., in s.o.’s presence
ماثلة mātila lamp, chandelier
ممثل mumattil representing, representative, representational; -- (pl.
-ūn) representative (also, e.g., diplomatic), deputy, agent; performer, player, stage player, actor; comedian │ تجاري ممثل (tijārī) commercial agent
ممثلة mumattlila pl. -āt actress
ممثلية mumattilīya representation, agency │ سياسية ممثلية (siyāsīya) diplomatic representation
ممثل mumattal depicted, portrayed; represented; assimilated (biol.)
مماثل mumātil resembling, similar, like, comparable; corresponding, analogous
متماثل mutamātil resembling each other, similar, of the same kind, homogeneous; mutually corresponding, homologous; identical; assimilating, assimilative
ممتثل mumtatil obedient, submissive, compliant
مثانة matāna pl. -āt (urinary) bladder
مج majja u (mail) to spit out, disgorge, eject, emit, discharge (ھ s.th.); to reject, dismiss, discard (ھ s.th.) II to become ripe, ripen, mellow
مجاج mujāj and مجاجة mujāja spittle, saliva; juice
مجد majada u (majd) and majuda u (مجادة majāda) to be glorious, illustrious, exalted II and IV to praise, extol, laud, glorify, celebrate V to be extolled, be glorified, be lauded, be praised; to bout, glory
مجد majd pl. امجاد amjād glory; splendor, magnificence, grandeur; nobility, honor, distinction
مجدي majdī laudable, praiseworthy, glorious
مجيد majīd glorious, illustrious; celebrated, famous; glorified. exalted; praiseworthy, laudable, admirable, excellent, splendid; noble │ المجيد الكتاب the Koran
مجيدي majīdī medjidie, a Turkish silver coin of 20 piasters coined under Sultan Abdul-Medjid; (of money) Turkish
امجاد amjād (pl. of مجيد) people of rank, distinguished people
 امجد amjad  pl. اماجد amājid  more glorious, more illustrious; more distinguished
تمجيد tamjīd praise, glorification, exaltation, idolization
 مجر majara u (majr) to be thirsty, feel thirsty, to thirst
مجر majr numerous (army)
ماجور mājūr pl. مواجير mawājīr  (eg.) round earthen trough or tub used for making dough; tall, bulging earthen vessel with a wide mouth
  المجر al-majar the Hungarians; Hungary
مجري majarī Hungarian 893
  مجر majar a small weight 18 ٣.١٦ = قيراط g (Eg.)
جرى see ماجريات Madrid majrīṭ  مجريط
مجوس look up alphabetically
مجلة majla pl. مجال mijāl, (coll.) مجل majl
blister; see also under جل jalla
ماجل mājil pl. مواجل mawājil  (tun.) cistern
ممجمج mumajmaj indistinct, scribbled, illegible
 مجن majana u (mujn, مجون mujūn, مجانة majāna) to joke, jest; to scoff, mock, jeer III to jeer, scoff, gibe (ه s.o.), mock, poke fun (ه at s.o.), joke, jest (ه with s.o.), make fun (ه of s.o.), play wild jokes (ه on s.o.) V to make insolent jokes VI to mock at each other
مجانة majāna buffoonery, clowning; (pl.
-āt prank; antic
مجان majjān, impudent, insolent, unrestrained, wanton, shameless; jester; prankster, wag, buffoon; free, free or charge, gratuitous; مجانا majjānan or بالمجان bi-l-majān free of charge, for nothing, gratis
مجاني majjānī free, free of charges, gratuitous
مجانية majjānīya gratuitousness, exemption from fees, remission of fees
مجون mujūn buffoonery, clowning; shamelessness, impudence
مجوني mujūnī brazen sarcast, cynic
ماجن mājin pl. مجان mujjān impudent, shameless, brazen, insolent, saucy; joker, jester, wag, buffoon
 ماجن mājin pl. مواجن mawājin  (= ماجل) (tun.) cistern
مجنيزيوم magnīzīyom magnesium
مجوس majūs Magi, adherents of Mazdaism
مجوسي majūsī Magian; Magus, adherent of Mazdaism
مجوسية majūsīyya Mazdaism
مح maḥḥ worn off, threadbare, shabby
مح muḥḥ the best, choicest part, pith, gist, quintessence; egg yolk
محص maḥaṣa a (maḥṣ) to render clear, clarify, purify (ھ s.th.) II do.; to rectify, put right ( ھ s.th.); to put to the test (ھ s.th.); to test, examine closely (ھ s.th.) IV to reappear, re-emerge, come out again V do.; to be clarified. be purified VII to he clarified, he purified
محيص maḥīṣ shiny, flashing (sword)
تمحيس tamḥīṣ pl. -āt clarification; testing, thorough examination
محض maḥaḍa a (maḥḍ) to he sincere (ه ھ toward s.o. in), show or manifest sincerely (ه ھ to s.o. s.th.; e.g., love, affection); -- maḥuḍa u (محوضة muḥūḍa) to be of pure descent; to be pure, genuine, unmixed, unadulterated IV to be sincere (ه ھ toward
s.o. in) V to devote o.s. exclusively (ل to s.th.), he solely dedicated (ل to s.th.)
محض maḥḍ of pure descent, pureblood; pure, unmixed, unadulterated; genuine; sheer, downright, outright (e.g., lie, nonsense, etc.); محضا maḥḍan only, merely, exclusively, solely │ اختياره بمحض bi-maḥḍi kt. entirely of his own accord; صالحھا لمحض li-maḥḍi ṣāliḥihā solely in her own interest, only for her own good
امحوضة umḥūḍa sincere advice
محق maḥaqa a (maḥq) to efface, blot out, strike out, erase (ھ s.th.); to eradicate, exterminate, annihilate, destroy (ھ s.th.) IV to wane, become invisible (moon); to 894 perish V, VII (انمحق or امحق immaḥaqa) and VIII to be or become
 effaced; to be annihilated, be destroyed, perish
محق maḥq effacement, obliteration; eradication, extermination, annihilation, destruction
محاق maḥāq, muḥāq, miḥāq waning of the moon
محك maḥuka a (maḥk) and maḥika a (maḥak) to be quarrelsome, contentious, cantankerous, quarrel, wrangle, bicker; to dispute stubbornly III to pick a quarrel, quarrel, wrangle, have an argument (ه with s.o.) IV and V = I
محك maḥik quarrelsome, contentious, cantankerous, disputatious, bickering; quarrelsome person, bickerer; wrangler
مماحكة mumaḥaka quarrelsomeness, disputatiousness, petulance; quarrel, row, wrangle, dispute; (pl. -āt) chicanery; bickering, wrangling
ماحك māḥik and مماحك mumāḥik quarrelsome, contentious, cantankerous, disputatious; quarrelsome person, bickerer, wrangler
محل maḥala a, maḥila a (maḥl, محول muḥūl) and maḥula u (محالة maḥāla) to be barren (land, year); -- maḥāla, maḥila a and maḥula u (محال miḥāl) to plot, scheme, intrigue (ب against s.o.) IV to be barren and arid; to render barren (ھ the soil); to be overdue, be withheld, fail to set in (rains) V to seek to attain by cunning or through intrigues (ھ s.th.), strive cunningly (ھ for); to seek a pretext; to propagandize or advertise (ل s.th.) artfully or with unfair means) │ العذر تمحل (‘udr) to use a pretext, make an excuse
محل maḥl barrenness, aridity, drought; dearth, famine; cunning, craft, deceit; (see also under حل ḥalla)
محالة maḥāla pl. محال maḥāl pulley, block and tackle; (see also حول)
محال muḥāl slyness, cunning, craft, insidiousness
ماحل māḥil barren, sterile; bare, bleak
ممحل mumḥil barren, sterile
محن maḥana a (maḥn) and VIII to try, try out, test, put to the test, subject to a test (ه s.o.,
ھ s.th.); to afflict, subject to a trial or trials (ه s.o.); to examine (ه s.o.)
محنة miḥna pl. محن miḥan severe trial, ordeal, tribulation; affliction; hardship, distress, suffering, misfortune
امتحان imtiḥān pl. -āt test, experiment; examination │ الدخول امتحان entrance examination; نھائي امتحان (nihā’ī) final examination
ممتحن mumtaḥin tester; examiner
ممتحن mumtaḥan examined; tried, tested; examinee, candidate
محو) محا) maḥā u (maḥw) to wipe off, rub out, scratch out, erase, strike out (ھ s.th.); to efface, obliterate, blot out (ھ s.th.); to wipe out, eradicate, exterminate, extinguish (ھ s.th.); to eliminate, abolish ( ھ s.th.) │ يمحى ال lā yumḥā ineffaceable, indelible II to wipe out, extinguish, exterminate, extirpate (ھ s.th.) V, VII ( انمحى and امحى immaḥā) and VIII to be effa ؤed, obliterated, extinguished, wiped out, exterminated; to disappear, vanish
محو maḥw effacement, obliteration, blotting out; erasure, deletion; elimination; abolition, abolishment, annulment
maḥḥāya محاية and mimḥāh ممحاة O
eraser
امحاء immiḥā’ extinction, extermination, extirpation
ماحية māḥiya eraser 895
مخ mukk pl. مخاخ mikāk, مخاخة mikāka brain; marrow, medulla; core, essence; purest and choicest part
مخي mukkī brain- (in compounds), cerebral
المخا al-mukā Mocha (seaport in SW Yemen)
 مخر makara a (makr, مخور mukūr) to plow; to move, out, shear, cleave (ھ through s.th.); (of a ship) to plow, traverse (ھ the sea)
ماخر mākir plowing the sea (ship)
ماخرة mākira pl. مواخر mawākr  ship  ماخور mākūr pl. مواخير mawākīr brothel مخق makraqa to brag, tell fibs; to swindle,
cheat
 مخض makaḍa a u i (makḍ) to chum (ھ milk); to shake violently (ھ s.th.); -- makiḍa a ( مخاض makāḍ, mikāḍ) to be parturient, be in labor V = I makiḍa; to bear, produce, bring forth, effect, bring about (عن s.th.); to be churned (milk)
مخاض makāḍ labor pains
مخيض makīḍ buttermilk
pl. mimkaḍa ممخضة and makkāḍa مخاضة
مماخض mamākiḍ churn
مخط makaṭa a u (makṭ, مخوط mukūṭ) and V to blow one’s nose
مخاط │ snot mucus, nasal mukāṭ مخاط aš- m. مخاط الشيطان and aš-šams m. الشمس gossamer šaiṭā
مخاطي mukāṭī snotty; mucous; slimy, ropy
مخيط mukaiṭ (eg.) sebésten (Cordia myxa L.; bot.)
مخطر II tamakṭara to walk with a graceful, swinging gait
 مخل mukl pl. امخال amkāl, مخول mukūl lever, pinch bar, crowbar
مخالي mikal, مخل pl. )مخالة (= mikla مخلة□  
makālī nosebag
مخمض makmaḍa to rinse the mouth
مد madda u (madd) to extend, distend, expand, dilate (ھ s.th.); to stretch, stretch out (ھ s.th.), crane (ھ the neck); to draw out, protract (ھ s.th.); to spread out (ھ s.th.); to layout (ھ s.th.), lay (ھ tracks, pipeline); to spread (ھ a net); to lengthen, elongate, prolong (ھ s.th.); to grant a respite or delay; to rise (flood, river); to help, aid, assist (ه s.o.), support (ه ب s.o. by or with), supply, provide (ه ب s.o. with); to reinforce (ھ an army); to fertilize, manure (ھ the soil) │ عمره مد (‘umrahū) to prolong s.o.’s life (of God); الى البصر مد (baṣara) to turn one’s eyes, direct one’s glance to; مد األرض في جذرا (jidran, arḍ) to strike roots (tree); له الحبالة مد to lay a snare for s.o.; مد كسائه بقدر رجله (rijlahū bi-qadri kisā’ihī) to cut one’s coat according to one’s cloth, make the beet of it, adjust o.s. to the circumstances; لحافه بقدر رجليه مد (rijlaihi
bi-gadri likāfihī) do.; سمعه مد (sam‘ahū) to prick up one’s ears; المائدة مد to set the
table; المشي في مد (mašy) to take long strides; المواسير مد to lay pipe; يده اليه مد (yadahū) to extend one’s hand to s.o. II to extend, distend, expand, dilate (ھ s.th.); to stretch out (ھ s.th.); to spread, spread out ( ھ s.th.); to lengthen, elongate, protract, prolong (ھ s.th.); to discharge pus, suppurate, fester III to delay, defer, procrastinate; to put off from day to day (ه s.o.) IV to help, aid, assist (ه s.o.), support (ه ب s.o. with), provide, supply, furnish (ب ه ھ، s.o., s.th. with); to lend, impart (ه ب to s.th. s.th.); to reinforce (. an army); to postpone, delay, grant a respite; to suppurate, fester │ بأجله امد (bi-ajalihī) to grant s.o. another respite in this life (of God) V to be spread, spread out, extended, stretched out; to extend, stretch, spread; 896 to lengthen, expend, distend, dilate; to stretch o.s., stretch out, sprawl (on a bed, end the like) VIII to be extended, distended, stretched; to be laid (wires, pipeline); to extend or reach (الى to s.th.), stretch, spread (الى to s.th., over a distance); to lengthen, become drawn out, become protracted or prolonged; to be long; to develop, grow (الى into) X to take, get, draw, derive, borrow (ھ من s.th. from), provide o.s. with (ھ); to ask for help (ه s.o.)
مد madd pl. مدود mudūd extension; distension, dilation, expansion; stretching; spreading; lengthening, elongation, prolongation, protraction; drawing out of the voice over long vowels (in Koran recitation); rising, rise (of water, of the flood); supply (ب with) │ البصر مد m. al- baṣar range of vision; madda l-b. as far as the eye can see; النظر مد m. an-naẓar farsightedness, foresight; المد حروف the “literae productionis” ي و ا (gram.)
مدة madda sign over alif (آ) denoting initial long a (’ā)
midād مداد amdād, امداد pl. mudd مد
mudd, a dry measure (Pal. = 18 l, Tangier
= 46.6 l)
مدة midda pus, purulent matter
مدة mudda pl. مدد mudad period (of time), space of time, interval; while; duration; limited or appointed time, term; مدة muddata within, in the course of,
 during │ مدة في ... within, in the course of, during; الزمان من مدة (zaman) period (of time), space of time, interval, while; muddatan min az-z. for a while, for some time
مدد madad pl. امداد amdād help, aid, assistance, support, backing, reinforcement; pl. resources; auxiliaries
مداد midād ink; lamp oil; fertilizer, manure, dung; pattern, style │ بمداد سجله الفخر sajjalahū bi-m. il-fakr to inscribe s.th. with golden letters; واحد مداد على after the same pattern
مديد madīd pl. مدد mudud extended, outstretched, stretched, elongated; long, prolonged, protracted; tall, big; slender, high, towering; المديد name of a poetical meter │ مديد زمان (zamān) or مديدة مدة (muda) long time; مديد عمر (‘umr) greet age; البصر مديد m. al-baṣar farsighted, farseeing
مداد maddād a creeping plant امدة amidda warp of a fabric تمديد tamdīd pl. -āt lengthening,
elongation, prolongation, extension
امداد imdād help, aid, assistance, support, sustentation, maintenance, provisioning; supply (mil.); pl. -āt auxiliaries, reinforcements, supplies
تمدد tamaddud extension, spreading, expansion; stretching, distention, dilation, dilatation, widening
امتداد imtidād stretching, stretch, extension, extensity; extensibility, dispensability; expansibility; widening, distention, dilation, dilatation, lengthening, elongation, prolongation; expanse; length; size, extent, spread, compass, range, scope │ امتداد على along, alongside of
استمداد istimdād procurement of support, bringing up of reinforcements; supply (mil.)
ماد mādd stretching, expanding, extending, spreading; trailing, creeping (plant)
مادة mādda pl. مواد mawādd  stuff, matter; material possession; substance;
material; component, constituent, ingredient; fundamental constituent, radical, chemical element, base; subject, theme, topic; school subject, field of study; discipline, subject matter, 897 curricular subject; article, paragraph (e.g., of a law, treaty or contract); stipulation, contractual term j pl. material, materials; agents, elements │ اصلية مادة (aṣlīya) root of a word; اولية مواد (awwalīya) primary elements; raw materials; تجارية مواد (tijārīya) articles of commerce, commodities; التجميل مواد cosmetics; مواد جنائية (jinā’īya) criminal cases (jur.); مواد حربية (ḥarbīya) war material; خام مواد raw materials; الصباغة مواد dyestuffs, dyes; مواد صلبة (ṣulba) solid constituents, solids (e.g., of milk); O مصنوعة مواد manufactured goods, ready-made goods; O التطيب مواد medicaments, drugs; اإلعاشة مواد m. al- i‘āša, المعيش مواد m. al-ma‘īš food-stuffs, food; غذائية مواد (gidā’īya) foodstuffs, victuals, food, nutritive substances; fodder; اللغة مواد m. al-luga vocabulary of a language; O للحيويات مضادة مواد (muḍādda
li-l-ḥayawīyāt antibiotics; ملتھبة مواد (multahiba) combustible materials, inflammable matter; fuel; مدنية مواد (madanīya) civil cases (jur.); النسيج مواد textiles
مادي māddī material; corporeal, physical; materialistic; (pl. -ūn) materialist; objective (as opposed to شخصي)
مادية māddīya materialism │ الماديات والمعنويات (ma‘nawīyāt) material and ideal things
ممدود mamdūd extended; outstretched; elongated; prolonged, protracted, drawn out; extensive, great, large; provided with madda (gram.)
ممدد mumaddad spread, outspread, outstretched; stretched out, sprawling, lying; extended, elongated, long
ممتد mumtadd extended, outstretched; spread, outspread, laid out; extending, stretching, spreading; extensive, wide, large, comprehensive
مستمد mustamadd taken, derived (من from)
 medal madāliyāt مداليات pl. madāliya مداليه
مداليون madaliyōn medallion, locket, pendant
مدح madaḥa a (madḥ, مدحة midḥa) to praise, commend, laud, extol (ه s.o.); to eulogize, celebrate in poems (ھه s.o.) II do. V to be commended, be praised, be lauded; to boast (ب of s.th.), glory (ب in), pride o.s. ( ب on), be proud (ب of) VIII = I
مدح madḥ commendation, laudation, praise; extolment, glorification; panegyrical litsrature; acclaim │ في المدح ﷲ the glorification of God
مديح madīḥ pl. مدائح madā’iḥ  praise, laudation, commendation; panegyrical poem, panegyric; eulogy, encomium, tribute
امدوحة umdūḥa pl. اماديح amādīḥ  praise, laudation, commendation; panegyrical poem; eulogy, encomium, tribute
تمدح tamadduḥ extolment, glorification; self-praise, vainglory, ostentation, swaggering
مادح mādiḥ and مداح maddāḥ panegyrist, encomiast, eulogist
 مدر madar (coll.; n. un. ة) clods of earth or mud, loam, clay │ والمدر الوبر اھل ahl al- wabar wa-l-m. the tent-dwellers and the city-dwellers, the nomads and the sedentary population
مدن madara clod of earth or mud; small hump of the ground
 مدراء mudarā’  pl. of مدير mudir, see دور مدراس madrās  Madras (state and city in S
India)
مدريد madrīd  Madrid
مدلن (Engl.) midlin middling, of medium quality (com.)
مدن II to found or build cities; to civilize, urbanize, humanize, refine V ٨٩٨ تمدن tamaddana to be or become civilized; تمدين tamadyana do.; to enjoy the comforts; of civilization, the amenities of life
مدينة madīna pl. مدن mudun, مدائن madā’in  town, city │ النبي مدينة or المدينة (usually followed by the epithet المنورة al- munawwara) Medina (city in W Saudi
Baghdad as-salām m. مدينة السالم Arabia); Town; Cape مدينة الكاب Iraq); of (capital cities big the (kubrā) المدن الكبرى
مدني madanī urban, urbanized, city- dwelling, town-dwelling; civilized, refined, polished; civilian (as opposed to military), civil, civic; secular; town dweller, townsman, city dweller, urbanite, citizen, civilian; of Medina, Medinan (adj. and n.) │ مدنية دعوى (da‘wā) civil action, civil suit, civil proceeding (jur.); الطيران المدني (ṭayarān) civil aeronautics; مدني قانون civil law
مدنية madanīya civilization
تمدين tamdīn civilizing, civilization, advancement in social culture, humanization, refining, raising of moral standards
تمديني tamdīnī civilizing, civilizatory, civilizational
تمدن tamaddun and تمدين tamadyun
civilization; refinement of social culture
تمدني tamaddunī civilized
متمدن mutamaddin civilized; sophisticated, refined, educated
متمدين mutamadyin civilized, provided with the comforts of civilization
مدى III to grant a respite or delay (ه to s.o.) IV do. VI to persist, persevere (في or ب or على in), keep, stick, adhere (في or ب or على to); to continue (في s.th.), keep or go on (في doing s.th.); to go far, go to extremes (في in); to continue, last, draw out
مدى madan extension, expanse, stretch, spread, compass, range, scope, space, latitude, reach; distance, interval, interspace; extent, degree, measure, scale, proportion; utmost point, extreme, limit; space of time, duration, period; (prep.) مدى mad4 for the duration of, during, in a (given) period of, in the course of │ مدى البصر m. l-baṣar range or field of vision, visual range; الحياة مدى m. l-ḥayāh lifetime; for life; الحيوي المدى (ḥayawī) lebensraum; الدوران مدى m. d-dawarān continually, constantly, perpetually; الصوت مدى m. ṣ- ṣaut roach of the voice, calling distance; العمر مدى m. l-‘umr lifetime; مدى m. l- ayyām throughout the days, continually;
 على مدى عشر distance; great a at الى مدى بعيد 10 of distance a at amtār) (‘ašri امتار مدفع بعيد المدى far-reaching, بعيد المدى meters; في المدى األخير gun; long-range (midfa‘) the in done, and said all’s when all, after analysis last
مدية madya, mudya, midya pl. مدى mudan, midan, مديات mudyāt, mudayāt butcher’s knife; knife
مدوي madawī, mudawī, midawī cutler
in مع التمادي، مع طول التمادي tamādin: تماد run long the
مديل (Fr. modèle) modēl pl. -āt model
مدين II tamadyana see مدن مذ mud since (= منذ mundu)
مذر madira a (madar) to be addle (egg), become rotten II to scatter, disperse, spread or sprinkle about (ھ s.th.) V = I
مذر شذر šadara madara scattered here and there
مذر madir spoiled, rotten, putrid
مذق madaqa u (madq) to mix with water, dilute
مذق madq watered wine 899
مذيق madīq diluted, mixed with water, watered, watery
mumādaq مماذق and madāq مذاق
insincere, hypocritical
مذل madila a (madl, مذال madāl) to reveal, disclooe (ب s.th. secret)
مذھب II tamadhaba see ذھب
 مر marra u (marr, مرور murūr, ممر mamarr) to pass (ب or على s.o., s.th. or by s.o., by s.th.), go, walk, saunter, or stroll by or past (على ب،); to march past s.o. (امام), pass in review (امام before s.o.; mil.); to pass, elapse, go by, run out (time); to come, go, walk, or pass along s.th. (ب or على), skirt ( ب or على s.th.); to pass, go, walk, move, march, travel (ب or من or على through), cross, traverse (من a place, a country, a room); to flow through, run through; to fly through; to lead, run, out (في through an area; border), pass (في over), cross (في an area); to go or pass (ب through a stage or phase), undergo (ب a state or phase); to
cross (على a border, s. line, mountains, etc.); to fly (فوق over an area; airplane); to depart, go away, leave; to continue (يفعل to do s.th.), keep, or go on, doing s.th. │ مر ذكره (dikruhū) it has been discussed, it has been mentioned above; بنا مر كما as it has passed before us, as we have already mentioned; باالمتحان مر to pass the examination; بسالم مر (bi-salām) to turn out well, go off without mishap; عليه مر ببصره (bi-baṣarihī) to scan s.th., peruse s.th. hastily; البرق مر مر (marra l-barq) to pass swiftly, flash past, flit past; مر مر الكرام (marra l-k.) to pass as if nothing had happened, brush past; الكرام مر (عليه) به مر to overlook s.th. generously, pass over s.th. with dignity, treat s.th. with disdain II to let pass (ھ s.th.); to convey, carry or take through (ھ s.th.); to pass (ھ the ball, in soccer) │ القناة في سفينة مرر (qanāh) to pass or take a ship through the canal IV to let (ه s.o.) go by or past s.o. or s.th. (على or ب); to let (ه s.o.) pass (على or ب s.th.); to make (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) go through s.th. (على or ب), lead, take or send (ه s.o.) through ( على or ب), pass,stick (على or ھ ب s.th. through); to insert (على or ھ ب s.th. in) │ على نظره امر (naẓarahū) to pass one’s glance over, let one’s eyes wander over X to last, endure, continue, go on; to remain, stay; to continue (على or في s.th., يفعل to do s.th.), persist, persevere (على or في in s.th.), keep (على or في to s.th., يفعل doing s.th.), go on (يفعل doing s.th.), stick, adhere (على or في to s.th.)
مر marr passing, going by; passage, transit; transition; crossing; progression, process, lapse, course (of time); iron shovel, spade; rope │ الزمان مر على (m. iz- zamān) in the course of time
مرة marra pl. -āt, مرار mirār time, turn; مرة marratan once; مرتين marrataini twice; ماتة marrātin repeatedly; several times, quite often; مرارا mirāran several times, more than once, quite often; at times, now and then, occasionally, sometimes │ ما مرة marratan mā or مرة ذات dāta marratin once, one time, one day; اخرى مرة marratan ukrā or جديدة مرة (jadīdatan) once again, once more, anew, مرة بعد مرة or مرة عن مرة time and again, again and again; المرة تلو المرة (tilwa) time after time, time
 and again; واحدة مرة (wāḥidatan) at once, at one time; eventually, finally, at last; اكثر مرة من (aktara) more than once, several times; بالمرة at all, absolutely, entirely; (with neg.) not at all, never, by no means; مرة غير gaira marratin or مرة ما غير repeatedly, several times, more than once; مرة كم kam marratan how often? how many times? السادسة للمرة for the sixth times; مرة آلخر li-ākiri marratin or للمرة األخيرة for the time; مرة ألول li-awali marratin for the first time; عديدة مرارا (‘adīdatan) frequently, often; وتكرارا مرارا ٠٠٩ (wa-takrāan) time and again, again and again
مرور murūr passing; parade, march past (امام); passage, march, journey, or trip through (على من، ب،), transit; flowing through, flow; crossing, traversal; flying over (فوق); uninterrupted sequence; traffic (street, tourist, shipping); progression, process, course, lapse (of time); (eg.) inspection │ الزمان مرور m. az-zamān expiration of the deadline; المرور تذكرة tadkirat al-m. permit, pass, laissez-passer; passport; المرور حركة ḥarakat al-m. through traffic; المرور شرطة šurṭat al-m traffic police, highway patrol; المرور نظام traffic regulations
ممر mamarr passing, going by; elapsing; lapse, expiration (of time); transition; crossing; access, approach; (pl.
-āt) aisle, passage, passageway, corridor; ford; (mountain) pass │ سفلي ممر (suflī) underpass; العصور ممر على in the course of centuries
امرار imrār passing through, insertion
استمرار istimrār duration, permanence, continuity, continuance, continuation, continued existence, survival; persistence
│ باستمرار continually, constantly; دواما واستمرارا (dawāman) constantly, continuously, incessantly, without interruption; االستمرار قوة qūwat al-ist. inertia, vis inertiae
مار mārr passing; going, walking, riding, etc., past or by; (pl. -ūn, مارة mārra) passer-by, pedestrian, walker, stroller │ ذكره المار (dikruhū) the above- mentioned, what has already been discussed
مستمر mustamirr lasting, permanent, enduring, constant, continual, uninterrupted, unceasing, incessant; continuous, unbroken │ مستمر تيار (tayyār) direct current (el.); مستمرة موجات (maujāt) continuous waves (phys.)
 مر marra u a (مرارة marāra) to be or become bitter II to make bitter, embitter (ھ s.th.) IV to be or become bitter; to make bitter ( ھ s.th.) VI to fight, contend, dispute (with each other) X to think bitter, find bitter (ھ s.th.)
مر murr pl. امرار amrār bitter; severe; sharp; painful; bitterness; myrrh │ مر الصحاري m. aṣ-ṣaḥārī colocynth (bot.)
مرة mirra pl. مرر mirar gall. bile; (pl.
امرار amrār) strength, power
مرارة marāra pl. مرائر marā’ir  bitterness; gall, gall bladder; innermost, heart │ غيظا مرارته انشقت (inšaqqat, gaiẓan) he burst with anger
مرير marīr pl. مرائر marā’ir  strong, firm, stubborn, tenacious, dogged, persistent, deep-seated, deep, profound (esp., of feelings)
مريرة marīra pl. مرائر marā’ir  firmness; detention, resoluteness; vigor, energy, tenacity, doggedness; steadiness, constancy
امر amarr  firmer, stronger; bitterer │ األمران the two bitter things (i.e., poverty and old age); األمرين قاسى qāsā l-amarrain to go through the worst, be exposed to greatest hardships
ممرور mamrūr bilious; foolish, crazy; fool
مرأ mara’a, مرئ mari’a a and مرؤ maru’a u ( مراءة marā’a) to be wholesome, healthful, palatable (food); -- مرؤ maru’a u (مروءة murū’a) to be manly; -- مرؤ maru’a u ( مراءة marā’a) to be healthy and salubrious (climate) X to find wholesome and tasty ( ھ food); to enjoy, savor, relish (ھ s.th.); to be able to digest (ھ s.th.; also fig.); to take to s.th. (ھ), take a liking (ب to), derive pleasure (ھ from)
امرأ ,امرء imra’ and امرؤ imru’ (with definite article المرء al-mar’) a man; 901 person, human being; المرء frequently for
 Engl. “one”, as المرء يظن (yaẓunnu) one would think
امرأة imra’a (with def. article المرأة al- mar’a) pl. see نسو, woman, wife │ المرأة المسلسلة (musalsala) Andromeda (astron.)
مروءة murū’a and مروة murūwa the ideal of manhood, comprising all knightly virtues, esp., manliness, valor, chivalry, generosity, sense of honor
مريء marī’ manly, virile; healthful, salubrious, healthy, wholesome │ مريئا ھنيئا (hanī’an) approx.: may it do you much good! I hope you will enjoy it (i.e, food)!
murū’ مروء amri’a, امرئة pl. marī’ مريء
esophagus, gullet
مراكش marrākuš , marrākiš  Marrakech (city in W Morocco); Morocco
مراكشي marrākušī, marrākišī Moroccan (adj. and n.)
مرث marata u (mart) to suck, bite (ھ one’s fingers); to soften, crush, squash, mash (ھ s.th.); to macerate, soak (in water; ھ s.th.)
  مرج marj pl. مروج murūj grass-covered steppe; pasture land; meadow
ومروج ھرج harj wa-marj confusion, jumble, tumult, hubbub
مرج maraj disorder, confusion, jumble
 مرجان marjān, murjān (coll.; n. un. ة) small pearls; corals │ مرج سمك samak m. goldfish
مرجاني marjānī coralline, coral, coralli- (in compounds), corallike, coral-red │ مرجانية جزيرة atoll; مرجانية شعاب coral reefs
مرجح marjaḥa to rock II tamarjaḥa to swing back and forth, pendulate, dangle; to be in suspense, be pending, be in abeyance
مرح mariḥa a (maraḥ) to be gay, merry, cheerful, in high spirits, hilarious, exuberant, lively; to be glad, happy, delighted; to rejoice, exult │ مرح سرح (sariḥa) to do as one likes, proceed arbitrarily
مرح maraḥ joy, cheerfulness, gaiety, glee, mirth, hilarity, merriment, liveliness
مراحى marḥā, مرحى pl. mariḥ مرح
marāḥā joyful, gay, happy, merry,
cheerful, lively, romping, hilarious, exuberant
مراح mirāḥ jollity, hilarity, exuberance
مريح marīḥ joyful, gay, happy, merry, cheerful, lively, romping, hilarious, exuberant
مرحى marḥā well done! bravo! │ مرحى ب bravo to ...
ممراح mimrāḥ of cheerful disposition, gay-tempered, blithe; gay, jovial person
مرحب marḥaba to welcome (ه s.o.)
مرخ marak a (mark) to oil, anoint,rub, embrocate (ھ the body) II do. V to rub one’s skin with a liniment, oil o.s., anoint o.s.
مرخ marik soft; slack, flabby, flaccid
مروخ marūk liniment; salve, unguent, ointment
مريخ mirrīk Mars (astron.)
مرد marada u (مرود murūd) and maruda (مرادة marāda, مرود murūda) to be refractory, recalcitrant, rebellious; to revolt, rebel ( على against) II to strip (ھ a branch) of its leaves; to plaster, mortar, face (ھ a building) V to be refractory, recalcitrant, to revolt, rebel (على agaist); to be insolent, arrogant, overbearing
مردى murdī pl. مرادى marādīy (punting) pole, boat hook 902
مراد marād, marrād pl. مراريد marārīd 
nape, neck
مريد ma.rid pl. مرداء muradā’ refractory, recalcitrant, rebellious
تمراد timrād pl. تماريد tamārīd  dovecot
امرر amrad , f. مرداء mardā’ , pl. مرد mard beardless; leafless (tree); dry, withered
تمرد tamarrud refractoriness, recalcitrance, disobedience, insubordination; uprising, insurrection, mutiny, revolt, rebellion
مارد mārid pl. -ūn, مردة marada, مراد murrād refractory, recalcitrant, defiant; rebel, insurgent; demon, evil spirit, devil; giant
 متمرد mutamarrid refractory, recalcitrant, disobedient, insubordinate, mutinous, rebellious
مردقوش mardaqūš marjoram
مرزبان marzubān pl. مرازبة marāziba vicegerent, provincial governor, satrap (in ancient Persia)
مردقوش marzanjūš مرزنجوش marzajūš, مرزجوش water), (in soak to (mars) u marasa مرس
macerate (ھ s.th.) III to exercise, pursue, practice (ھ s.th., esp., a profession); (intr.) to practice, have or operate a practice; to carry out, execute (ب an action); to apply
o.s. (0 to s.th.), go in for (ھ); to try V to rub o.s. (ب with, against); to have trouble, be at odds (ب with); to exercise (ب an office), pursue, practice (ب a profession); to work (ب with), be in practical contact, have actually to do (ب with s.th.); to have to cope or struggle (ب with s.th.) VI to fight, struggle, contend with each other
مرس mars game which is won by getting all the tricks
مرس maris pl. امراس amrās seasoned, practiced, experienced, veteran
مرسة marasa pl. امراس amrās rope, cord, line; cable, hawser
مراس mirās and مراسة marāsa strength, power │ المراس سھل sahl al-m. tractable, manageable, docile, compliant; المراس شديد or المراس صعب (ṣa’b al-m. intractable, unruly, refractory; المراس صعوبة intractability, unruliness, refractoriness, recalcitrance
مريسة marīsa a kind of beer
مريسي marīsī hot south wind (eg.)
ممارسة mumārasa pursuit, exercise, practicing (of a profession); execution, implementation; practical application; practice; experience, routine; negotiation
تمرس tamarrus practicing, practice (ب of an activity, of a profession)
مرسيليا marsīliyā Marseille (seaport in SE France)
مرسين marsīn myrtle (myrtus; bot.)
مرش maraša u (marš) to scratch (ھ s.th.)
مرشال maršāl (field) marshal
مرص murṣ Morse (code)
مرض mariḍa a (maraḍ) to be or become lick; to fall ill, be taken ill II to make ill or sick (ه s.o.); to nurse, tend (ه a sick person) IV to make ill or sick (ه s.o.) V to be infirm, ailing, sickly, weak VI to feign illness, malinger
مرض maraḍ pl. امراض amrāḍ disease, malady, ailment; illness, sickness │ مرض الدقيقي البياض m. al-bayāḍī ad-daqīqī mildew; عصبي مرض (‘aṣabī) nervous disease, neuropathy; عقلي مرض (‘aqlī) mental disease; فحمي مرض (faḥmī) blight, blast (of grain); فرنجي مرض (firanjī) syphilis; معد مرض (mu‘din) contagious disease; باطنية امراض (bāṭinīya) internal diseases; ٣٠٩ سرية امراض (sirrīya) venereal diseases; صدرية امراض (ṣadrīya) diseases of the chest, pulmonary diseases
رضي see murḍin مرض
مرضى maraḍī relating to disease, morbid, pathological, patho- (in compounds)
مريض marīḍ pl. مرضى marḍā, مراضى marāḍā sick, ill, ailing; diseased; unwell, indisposed; sick person, patient │ مريض نفسي (nafsī) psychopath
ممراض mimrāḍ sickly, in poor health, ailing
تمريض tamrīḍ sick-nursing
ممرض mumarriḍ (male) sick nurse, hospital attendant; ambulance man, first- aid man; doctor’s assistant
ممرضة mumarriḍa sick nurse, nurse (f.)
متمرض mutamarriḍ sickly, in poor health, ailing
مرط marṭa u (marṭ) to tear out, pull out, pluck out (ھ hair) II do. V to fall out (hair)
مرطاء f. amraṭ, امرط and marīṭ مريط
marṭā’, pl. مرط murṭ hairless
مرع mara‘a a (mar‘) to rub over, anoint (ھ s.th.)
amrā‘ امراع amru’, امرع pl. mar‘ مرع
pasture
مرعة mur‘a grease, oil
 مريع marī‘ fertile, productive (soil)
ممراع mimrā‘ thriving, flourishing, prosperous (city)
مرغ II to roll (in the dust) (ھ s.th.); to rub over (ھ s.th.); to rub (ھ s.th.) IV to soil, sully, make dirty (ھ s.th.) V to roll, wallow (esp., in the dust); to waver irresolutely
مرغرين margarīn margarine
مرفين murfīn morphine
مرق maraqa u (مروق murūq) to pierce, penetrate (من s.th. or s.o.; esp., of an arrow), go or pass through (من); to dart, rush, shoot, or fly past, pass swiftly; to hurry away, scamper away; to stray (e.g., of an arrow); to digress, deviate; to renege, renounce (esp. الدين من the true faith) │ السھم مرق (sahmu) (lit.: the arrow hal passed through, i.e.) the matter is finished, done with. settled II to sing
مرق maraq and مرقة maraqa broth, bouillon; gravy
مروق murūq straying, deviation; apostasy, defection, desertion, disloyalty
مروقي murūqī (tun.) nickname of professional Koran reciters in Tunis; (tun.) pallbearer
مارق māriq pl. مراق murrāq, مرقة maraqa straying; apostate, renegade, defector, turncoat, deserter; heretic
ممارق mumāriq insolent, impudent
مركز II tamarkaza to concentrate (في on, at, in); to settle, establish o.s. gain a footing, take root; to consolidate one’s position; to gravitate (to)
ركز see etc., مركز، مركزية alphabetically up look مركيز concentration; tamarkuz تمركز
consolidation (of a position)
مراكش marrākuš , marrākiš  Marrakech (city in W Morocco); Morocco
مراكشي marrākišī, marrākišī Moroccan (adj. and n.)
مركيز markīz marquis
مرمطون and marmatōn marmiton) (Fr. مرمتون
pl. -āt kitchen boy, scullery boy
 مرمر marmara to be or become bitter; to become angry II tamarmara to murmur, mumble; to grumble 904
 مرمر marmar marble
مرمري marmarī marble (adj.)
مرمط marmaṭa (eg.) to spoil, damage (ھ s.th.)
مرمتون see مرمطون
مرميس mirmīs rhinoceros
  مرن marana u (مرانة marāna, مرون murūn, مرونة murūna) to be pliant, flexible, ductile, elastic; -- (مرون murūn, مرانة marāna) to be or become accustomed, get used (على to) II to train, drill (ه s.o.); to accustom, condition, season, inure (ه على
s.o. to), make (ه s.o.) get used (على to); V to become accustomed, get used (على to); to exercise, practice (على s.th.), train (على in), be practiced, trained, experienced (على in); to be drilled, drill
مرن marin pliant, pliable, flexible, bending; elastic; plastic; supple, limber, lithe; ductile, extensible; yielding, compliant
مرانة marāna and مرونة murūna pliancy, pliability, flexibility; elasticity; ductility; plasticity; agility, nimbleness; resilience
تمرين tamrīn pl. -āt, تمارين tamārīn  exercise, practice, training; military training, drill; practical experience; expertness, skill; preparatory training, (period of) probation, apprenticeship, traineeship │ ابتدائي تمرين (ibtidā’ī) basic training; جندية تمارين jundīya) or تمرينات عسكرية (‘askarīya) military exercises, maneuvers; O الزيادة تمرين coaching, tutoring; extra drill (mil.); رياضية تمرينات (riyāḍīya) gymnastic exercises; التمرين تحت undergoing preparatory training, engaged on probation (official, employee)
مران mirān expertness, skill; exercise, practice, drill, training; habituation, habit; accustomedness; practical experience; routine
تمرن tamarrun exercise, practice, training
ممرن mumarrin trainer, coach; instructor; drill sergeant
 ممرن mumarran practiced, seasoned, experienced, trained, skilled (على in); accustomed, used (على to)
متمرن mutamarrin practiced, seasoned, experienced, trained, skilled (على in); accustomed, used (على to); probationer, undergoing probation, probationary
alphabetically up look موارنة pl. ماروني  
  مرو marw Merv (present-day Mary, town in Turkmen S.S.R.)
مروي marwī, marawī native of Merv
  مرو marw (coll.; n. un. ة) pebble; flint
مروءة see مروة  
  مرى III to wrangle, argue, dispute (ه with s.o.; to resist, oppose (ه s.o.); to contest (في s.th.) VIII to doubt (في s.th.)
مرية murya, mirya doubt, quarrel, wrangle, argument, dispute
مراء mirā’ quarrel, wrangle, argument, dispute; doubt │ مراء بال (bi-lā) or مراء ال (mirā’a) incontestable, indisputable, unquestionable, undisputed, uncontested; ان في مراء ال it is an incontrovertible fact that ..., unquestionably …
رأى see مرآة pl. مرايا  
مريم maryam  Mary, Maria
مريمية maryamīya sage (bot.)
مزmazza u (mau) to suck
مز muzz sourish, acidulous
مزة mazza pl. -āt and مازة māzza (eg.) relishes, appetizers (taken with drink)
مزج mazaja u (mazj, مزاج mizāj) to mix, mingle, blend (بين different things, ٥٠٩ ه ب s.th. with) III to form a mixture or compound, be mixed, be blended, mix, mingle, blend, combine (ھ with s.th.); to adapt o.s. (ه to s.o.), humor (ه s.o.) VI to intermix:, intermingle, interblend, be intermixed, be intermingled VIII to be mixed, be mingled, be blended, mix, mingle, blend (ب with)
مزج mazj mixing, blending
مزاج mizāj pl. امزجة amzija mixture, medley, blend; temperament, temper, nature, disposition; frame of mind, mood,
humor, vein; physical constitution; condition, (state of) health │ دموي مزاج (damawī) sanguine temperament; مزاج سودوي (saudawī) melancholic temperament; صفراوي مزاج (ṣafrāwī) choleric (or bilious) temperament; مزاج بلغمي (balgamī) phlegmatic temperament; العام المزاج (‘āmm) popular taste; لطيف مزاج delicate nature, weakly constitution; محرور المزاج hot-tempered; المزاج منحرف munḥarif al-m. unwell, indisposed, out of sorts; ھذا مزاجي يوافق ال (yuwājiqu) this is not to my taste
مزيج mazīj compounded, blended (من of); mixture, medley, blend (من of); combination, compound, alloy
تمازج tamāzuj intermixing, intermingling, interblending. intermixture
امتزاج imlizāj mixture, blend
مزح mazaḥa a (mazḥ) to joke, jest, make fun III to joke, make fun (ه witb s.o.)
مزاحة and mizāḥ muzāḥ, مزاح mazḥ, مزح
muzāḥa joking, joke, jest, fun
مزاح mazzāḥ and مازح māziḥ joker, jester, buffoon, wag
مزر mizr a kind of beer
مزع maza‘a a (maz‘) to run, bound, tear along, gallop along; to tear apart (ھ s.th.); to tear, rip (ھ من s.th. off) II to pick, pluck (ه wool or cotton); to tear to pieces (ھ s.th.)
مزعة muz‘a, miz‘a pl. مزع muza‘, miza‘
piece, bit, bite; flock of wool
مزق mazaqa i (mazq) to tear, rend, rip apart (ھ s.th.) II to tear, rend, rip apart (ھ s.th.); to tear up, tear to pieces, shred (ھ s.th.) V to get torn, be rent; to be in shreds, get torn to pieces; to burst open, tear, break, snap
مزق mazq tearing, tearing up, rending; tear, rent, rupture
مزقة mizqa pl. مزق mizaq piece torn off, shred
تمزيق tamzīq tearing, rending, shredding, fragmentation
مزمز mazmaza to sip
مزن muzn (coll.; n. un. ة, pl. مزن muzan) rain clouds
 مزية mazīya pl. مزايا mazāya and مازية māziya pl. -āt advantage; privilege, prerogative; excellence, superiority; merit, virtue
مس massa a (mass, مسيس masīs) to feel, finger, handle, palpate (ه s.o., III s.th.); to touch (ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to violate (ھ s.th. sacred), infringe (ھ upon); to cohabit (ھ with a woman); to hit, befall (ه s.o.; damage, calamity) │ بأذى مسه (bi-adan) or بسوء مسه (bi-sū’in) to harm, wrong, hurt s.o.; مس الشيء بسوء to be injurious, damaging to s.th., hurt, impair, prejudice s.th.; مست
الى الحاجة (ḥājatu) circumstances require ..., (it) is necessary, urgently needed; لغما مس (lugman) to hit a mine III to touch (ه s.o.); to be in touch, be in contact (ه with s.o.) VI to touch each other, be in mutual contact
مس mass touching, touch; contact; misfortune, calamity; attack, fit (of a disease) j insanity, madness, frenzy, possession │ الحمى مس m. al-ḥummā attack of 906 fever; الجنون من مس اصابه (aṣābahū) he has gone crazy
مسة massa (n. vic.) touch
مساس masās touching, feeling, handling, fingering, palpation; violation ( عن of), infringement, encroachments (ب e.g., upon a right); connection, relation, contact │ ب مساس له it is connected
with ..., it touches upon ..., it concerns; فيما ب مساس له concerning ..., regarding ...
مسيس masīs touching, touch │ مسيس عند should the necessity arise, if (or when) necessary; الى الحاجة مسيس في ھو he is in urgent need of ...
مماسة mumāssa touching, tangency; adjacency, contiguity; contact
تماس tamāss (mutual) contact
ماس māss tangent; touching, (ب s.th., also fig., upon s.th.); adjacent, adjoining, contiguous; urgent, pressing, important │ ماسة حاجة urgent need, exigency; ماسة الحاجة اليه it is urgently needed; كھربائي ماس (kahrabā’) short circuit
ممسوس mamsūs touched; palpable, tangible; mentally deranged, insane
مماس mumāss tangent (math.)
مسترده (It. mostarda) mustarda mustard
مصطكاء = mistika مستكه
مستلة (It. mastello) mastilla pl. -āt tub
 مسح masaḥa a (masḥ) to stroke with the hand (ھ s.th.); to wipe off, wipe away (ھ s.th.); to rub off (ھ s.th.); to wash, wash off (ھ s.th.); to wipe out, blot out, erase (ھ s.th.); to clean, polish (ھ s.th.); to smooth, smooth with a plane, to plane (ھ s.th.); to rub (ه ب s.o. with); to anoint (ه ب s.o. with); to deprive, dispossess (ه من s.o. of), take away, withdraw (ه من from s.o. s.th.);
-- (masḥ, مساحة misāḥa) to survey (ھ land, estate, etc.), make a cadastral survey (ھ of) 0 to wipe off (ھ s.th.); to rub, anoint (ه s.o.); to cajole, coax, wheedle, persuade (ه s.o.); to Christianize (ه s.o.) III to cajole, coax, wheedle, persuade (ه s.o.) V to wipe o.s., wash o.s.; to provoke (ب s.o.), pick a quarrel (ب with)
مسح masḥ wiping, wiping off; cleaning; robbing, embrocation; anointing, anointment, (extreme) unction; land survey
مسح misḥ pl. مسوح musūḥ coarse woolen fabric, haircloth, sacking; pl. hair shirt, monastic garb, monk’s frock │ المسوح لبست labisat il-musūḥa to take the veil, become a nun
مسحة masḥa (n. vic.) a rubbing, embrocation; anointing, anointment; unction; tinge, shade, air, appearance, veneer (fig.); trace. touch (of s.th.) │ مسحة األرض extreme unction; بالمسحة المريض مسح to administer extreme unction to a sick person
مساح massāḥ land surveyor; bootblack, shoeblack, shoeshine
مساحة misāḥa pl. -āt plane, surface; area; acreage; floor space; surface extent; terrain sector (mil.); surveying, survey; geodesy; cadastre │ األراضي مساحة m. al- arāḍī land surface; area, acreage; مساحة مائية (mā’īya) area of water; المساحة مصلحة maṣlaḥa al-m. survey department, land registry office
مسيح masīḥ pl. مسحاء musaḥā’ , مسحى anointed; wiped, clean, smooth; المسيح the Messiah, Christ
 مسيحي masīḥī Christian, Messianic; (pl.
-āt) a Christian │ المسيحي الدين (dīn) the Christian faith, Christianity
المسيحية al-masīḥīya Christendom;
Christianity, the Christian faith
ممسح mimsāḥ and ممسحة mimsaḥa pl. مماسح mamāsīḥ  dust cloth, dish rag, floor rag; doormat; scraper 907
ماسح masḥ bootblack, shoeblack, shoeshine
ممسوح mamsūḥ wiped, wiped off, wiped clean; cleaned; smoothed, planed; polished; smooth; anointed; abraded, worn (coin) │ المعنى من ممسوح (ma‘nā) senseless, meaningless, inane
 تمساح timsāḥ pl. تماسيح tamāsīḥ crocodile (zool.)
مسخ masaka a (mask) to transform (ه الى – من
s.o. from -- into), transmute, convert (ھ s.th.); to falsify, distort (ھ s.th.); to mar, spoil (ھ s.th.)
مسخ mask transformation, metamorphosis; transmutation, conversion; falsification, distortion, misrepresentation; metempsychosis
مسخ mask, misk pl. مسوخ musūk transformed into an animal; misshapen, deformed, disfigured; ugly, misshapen midget; freak, monstrosity; monster
مسخة maska (eg.) buffoon, harlequin, clown
مسيخ transformed; disfigured, defaced, deformed, ugly; tasteless, insipid, stale
ممسوخ mamsūk transformed; marred, spoiled; disfigured, defaced, deformed, ugly
مسخر maskara to ridicule, mock, deride (ه s.o.) II tamaskara to make fun (على of), laugh (على at)
مسد II to massage (اعضاءه a‘ḍā’ahū s.o.’s limbs)
امساد misād, مساد pl. (coll.) masad مسد
amsād palm fibers, raffia
تمسيد tamsīd massage
  ماسورة look up alphabetically
  مسرىmasrā the 12  month of the Coptic calendar
مسطرة (It. mostra) masṭara pl. مساطر masāṭir 
sample, specimen; see also سطر
مسقط masqaṭ Masqat (seaport and capital of Oman)
 مسك masaka u i (mask) to grab, grasp, clutch, clasp, seize (ب or ھ s.th.), take hold ب or ھ of); to hold, hold fast (ب or ھ s.th.); to stick, cling, cleave, adhere, hang on (ب to)
│ الحسابات مسك (ḥisābāt) to keep the books, keep the accounts; مسك (daffata l-u.) to be at the helm, be in charge; لسانه مسك (lisānanahū) to keep one’s tongue in check II to scent with musk (ھ s.th.); to have (ه s.o.) seize or hold IV to seize, grip, grasp, clasp, clutch, hold (ب or ھ s.th.); to hold fast, grab (ب or ه ,ھ s.o., s.th., ه من
s.o. by his hair, and the like); to hold back, keep, detain, restrain (ه ,ھ s.o., s.th., عن from); to withhold, not to expend (ھ s.th.); to refrain, abstain, keep, desist (عن from), forbear, cease, stop (عن doing s.th.), keep away, remain aloof (عن from); to keep, retain (ھ نفسه على s.th. for o.s.) │ عليك امسك (amsik) keep ...! واقفا نفسه امسك waqifan) to hold o.s. upright; بيده امسك (bi-yadihī) to take s.o. by the hand; يده امسك (yadahū) to take s.o.’s hand; الصدور عن امسكت to stop publication, fold up (newspaper); امسك لسانه (lisānahū) to keep one’s tongue in check; البطن امسك (baṭna) to constipate (med.) V to hold on, hold fast (ب to), clutch (ب s.th.); to stick, cling, cleave (ب to); to hang on (ب to), persist (ب in); to keep, adhere (ب to s.th.); to rise (prices), harden, firm up (quotations) │ باھدافه تمسك (bi-ahdābihī) to be most devoted to s.o., be at s.o.’s beck and call, be under s.o.’s thumb; الشيء بأھداب تمسكto adhere, cling to s.th.; برأيه تمسك (bi-ra’yihī) to stick to  one’s opinion VI to hold together, be firmly connected, be interlocked; to compose o.s., pull o.s. together; to remain undaunted, remain calm, be 908 composed; to stay on one’s feet; to be in full possession of one’s strength; to refrain, abstain, keep (عن from) X to keep, stick, cling, adhere (ب to); to grab, seize ( ب s.th.); to refrain, abstain, keep (عن from)
مسك mask seizure, grip, hold; detention
m. مسك الحسابات bookkeeping; مسك الدفاتر │
 al-ḥisābāt keeping of accounts, accountancy
مسك maska pl. masakāt grip, hold
مسك الجن │ musk f.) and (m. misk مسك
m.	al-jinn a variety of goosefoot (Chenopodium Botrys; bot.); الختام مسك m. al-kitām lit.: the concluding musk (i.e., with which, originally, a letter was finally perfumed), the best following in the end, the crowning touch
مسكة miska a little, a touch, a glimpse, a whiff (من of)
مسك musuk and مسكة musaka grasping, greedy, avaricious
مسكة muska pl. مسك musak handle; hold; grip; handhold, support │ األمل مسكة m. al- amal that to which hope clings
مسكة muska, musuka and مساكة masāka, misaka avarice
مسكان muskān earnest money, pledge مساك misāk dam, weir; hem, border مسيك masīk tenacious; avaricious,
miserly; watertight, waterproof
امساك imsāk seizure; restraint, detention, check; stop, cessation; abstinence; avarice; constipation (med.); time of the day which marks the beginning of the Ramadan fast
امساكية imsākīya calendar of fasting during the month of Ramadan
تمسك tamassuk adherence; devotedness, devotion, attachment; written commitment, IOU; firming-up, or consolidation, of the market, hardening of quotations │ التمسك قانون legal moratorium, moratory law (jur.)
تماسك tamāsuk holding together, cohesiveness; coherence; cohesion (phys.); firmness, solidity; tenacity
استمساك istimsāk adherence, loyalty (ب
to)
ممسك mumassak musky, musk-scented, perfumed
ممسك mumsik holding, clutching, grabbing; checking, restraining.
withholding; economical, thrifty; grasping, greedy, avaricious
متمسك mutamassik holding fast, hanging on, clinging, adhering; tenacious; firm, solid
متماسك mutamāsik holding together, coherent, cohesive, hanging together, firmly connected, interlocked; continuous, uninterrupted; firm, solid; tenacious
مستمسك mustamsik composed, calm (mind)
 مسكاتي muskātī muscatel (wine)
مسكن II tamaskana to become poor, be reduced to poverty; to pretend to be poor; to feign poverty or humility; to be submissive, servile, slavish, fawning
مسكنة maskana poverty, misery; humbleness, humility, submissiveness
مسكين miskīn pl. -ūn, مساكين masākīn  poor, miserable; beggar; humble, submissive, servile
مسو II to wish (ه s.o.) a good evening │ ﷲ مساك بالخير massāka llāhu bi-l-kair good evening! III see صبح III; IV to enter into evening; to be or become in the evening; to be, become │ امسى اذا ويفعله اصبح اذا يفعله (aṣbaḥa) he does so in the morning and in the evening 909
امسيات amsā’, امساء pl. masā’ مساء
amsīyāt evening; masā’an in the evening
│ امس مساء masā’a amsi yesterday evening, last night; الخير مساء m. al-kair or بالخير مساؤكم good evening! مساء صباح ṣabāḥa masa’a mornings and evenings, in the morning and in the evening
األخبار │ (adj.) evening masā’ī مسائي news evening the المسائية
امسية umsīya pl. اماسي amāsīy evening
alphabetically up look مسورة = ماسورة
مسي masā i (masy) to make lean, cause to lose flesh, emaciate (ھ livestock; of the heat)
مسيو (Fr. Monsieur) misyū Mr.; sir
مش mašša u (mašš) to suck the marrow (ھ from a bone); to macerate, soak in water ( ھ s.th.)
مش mišš whey
 مشوش mašūš napkin
مشيج māšīj gamete, germ cell
مشح mašaḥa a (mašḥ) to administer extreme unction (ه to s.o.)
مشحة mašḥa extreme unction
مشط mašaṭa u i (mašṭ) to comb II do. V and VIII to comb one’s hair
مشط mušṭ pl. amšāṭ, مشاط mišāṭ comb; rake; bridge (of stringed instruments); O (mil.) cartridge clip │ الرجل مشط m. ar-ril metatarsus, instep (anat.); اليد مشط m. al- yad metacarpus (anat.)
مشطي mušṭī toothed, indented, jagged, dentate; comblike, pectinate
تمشيط tamšīṭ combing, carding (of wool)
ماشط māšiṭ barber, hairdresser
ماشطة māšiṭa lady’s maid; (woman) hairdresser
ممشط mumallal combed, carded (wool)
مشق mašaqa u (mašq) to draw out, stretch, extend (ھ s.th.); to comb (ھ s.th.); to tear, tear up, shred (ھ s.th.); to whip, lash (ھ s.o.) V to be or get tom or shredded VIII to snatch away, whip away (ھ من s.th. from s.o.); to draw, unsheathe (ھ the sword)
مشق mašq pl. امشاق amšāq model, pattern (esp., one to be copied in writing)
مشق mišq slender, slim, svelte
مشقة mišqa pl. مشق mišaq flock of wool or cotton; rag, clout, shred; scrap of carding wool; scrap of hemp, oakum
مشيق mašīq slender, slim, svelte
مشاق mušāq scrap of flax or hemp; oakum, tow
مشاقة mušāqa scrap of flax or hemp; oakum, tow │ حرير مشاقة floss
امتشاق imtišāq slenderness
ممشوق mamšūq slender, slim, svelte │ كالحسام ممشوق (ka-1-ḥusām) slender as a wand
ماشك look up alphabetically
مشلوز mišlauz sweet-kerneled apricot
مشمش mišmiš (coll.; n. un. ة) apricot; apricot tree │ كالبي مشمش (kilābī) bitter-kerneled apricot; حموي) لوزي مشمش) (lauzī, ḥamawi) sweet-kerneled apricot
مشمال mušmullā, mišmilla medlar (bot.)
مشملة mušmula, mišmila medlar (bot.)
المشھد al-mašhad Meshed (city in NE Iran) (مشو and مشى (مشي mašā i (mašy) to go
on foot, walk; to go; to pace, stride; to move along, proceed; to march │ مشى بالنميمة to scatter slanderous rumors II to let or make (ه s.o.) go or walk; to adapt, adjust, fit, accommodate (ھ مع s.th. to) III to keep pace, keep in step (ه with s.o.); to go along, keep up, keep abreast (ه ھ، with s.o., with s.th.), keep to s.o.’s (٠١٩ (ه side; to be likeminded (ه في with s.o. in s.th.), be guided by the same consideration or principles (ه في as s.o. in s.th.), act in unison (ه في with s.o. in s.th.) IV = II; to have an aperient effect (ه on s.o.; med.) V to go on foot, walk; to take a walk, to stroll, promenade; to walk slowly, saunter; to pass, move along, stride along; to keep step, keep up, keep abreast, go along, agree, harmonize, be compatible, be
-consistent, be in accordance, be in keeping (مع with), fit, suit (مع s.th.), be appropriate, correspond, come up (مع to s.th.); to proceed (على in accordance with a principle or method); to follow, observe ( على a principle) │ اوصاله في تمشى approx.: to perfuse s.o.’s limbs (of a sensation); وذھابا جيئة تمشى (jī’atan wa-dahāban) to walk back and forth, pace up and down
مشو mašw a laxative, aperient
مشى mašy going, walking; walk
مشية mišya manner of walking, gait, pace, step, bearing, carriage
مشاء mašā’ pl. -ūn good walker; walker (athlet.)
مشاية mašāya pl. -āt long, narrow carpet, runner; O baby walker, gocart; hallway, corridor; footpath, path(way)
ممشى mamšā pl. مماش mamāšin hallway, corridor, passageway, passage; aisle; footpath, path(way), alley; promenade; crossing, overpass, bridge; bridge of a ship; runner, small rug
 مع تمشيا tamaššiyan ma‘a (or على) in conformity with, in accordance with, according to
ماش māšin pl. مشاة mušāh going, walking; pedestrian; foot soldier, infantryman; المشاة the infantry; ماشيا māšiyan on foot
mawāšin مواش pl. māšiya ماشية
livestock, cattle
مص maṣṣa (1  pers. perf. masistu) a and (1  pers. perf. maṣaṣtu) u (maṣṣ) to suck, suck up, soak up, suck in, absorb (ھ s.th.); to sip, lap, lap up, lick up (ھ s.th.); to suck out (ھ s.th.) V to sip gradually, drink in small sips (ھ s.th.) VIII to suck, suck up, suck in (ھ s.th.); to sip, lap, lap up, lick up (ھ s.th.); to soak up, absorb, swallow up ( ھ s.th.)
مص maṣṣ sucking, suction, suck, sucking up, soaking up, soak, soakage, absorption │المص قصب qaṣab al-m. sugar cane
مصة maṣṣa (n. vic.) sucking, suck, suction; sip
مصاص maṣāṣ one who sucks, sucker; cupper; bloodsucker, extortioner, usurer
مصاصة muṣāṣa that which one sucks, s.th. to suck │ القصب مصاصة m. al-qaṣab sugar-cane refuse
مصاصة maṣṣāṣa screech owl; vampire مصيص maṣīṣ moist, damp (ground) مصيص miṣīṣ string, twine, packthread ممص mimaṣṣ suction pipe, sucker; O
siphon
امتصاص imtiṣāṣ sucking, suck, suction; sucking up, soaking up, soak, soakage, absorption │ االمتصاص قوة qūwat al-imt. suction
ممصوص mamṣūṣ soaked up; drained, exhausted; emaciated, very lean, skinny
ممتص mumtaṣ soaking up, absorbing; absorbent, absorptive
مصر II to found, build, settle, civilize, colonize (ھ a place); to Egyptianize, make Egyptian (ھ s.th.) V to become a populated, civilized area, become a big
city, a metropolis; to Egyptianize, adopt Egyptian ways; to become an Egyptian
مصر miṣr pl. امصار amṣār big city; metropolis, capital; -- miṣr , (colloq.) 911 maṣr Egypt; Cairo │ القاھرة مصر Cairo; الجديدة مصر Heliopolis (section of modern Cairo)
مصري miṣrī Egyptian; Cairene; (pl.
-ūn) an Egyptian; a Cairene, a native of Cairo
مصرية miṣrīya Egyptianism, Egyptian national character; (pl. -āt) Egyptian woman or girl
مصير pl. امصرة amṣira, مصران muṣrān, مصارين maṣārīn  gut; pl. bowels, intestines, guts, tripe; see also under صير
تمصير tamṣīr settling, settlement, colonization, civilization; Egyptianization
متمصر mutamaṣṣir Egyptianized, naturalized in Egypt
مصطكاء maṣṭakā’, muṣṭakā’ and مصطكى maṣṭakā mastic, resin of the mastic tree (Pistacia lenticus); liquor distilled from mastic │ المصطكاء شجرة šajarat al-m. mastic tree (Pistacia lenticus; bot.)
مصل maṣala u to curdle (milk); to strain, filter (ھ s.th.)
مصل maṣl whey; (pl. مصول muṣūl) serum (med.) │ المصول علم ‘ilm al-m. serology
مصلي maṣlī serous (med.)
مصمص maṣmaṣa to suck(ھ s.th.); to suck up, soak up, absorb (ھ s.th.); to sip and turn around in the mouth (ھ a liquid) II tamaṣmaṣa to sip and turn around in the mouth (ھ a liquid)
مض maḍḍa u (maḍḍ, مضيض maḍīḍ) to hurt, pain (ه s.o.); to burn, sting (ه s.o.); to torment, harass, trouble, molest (ه ب s.o. with); -- (1  pen. perf. maḍiḍtu) a (مضض maḍaḍ, مضيض maḍīḍ, مضاضة maḍāḍa) to be in pain, feel pain, suffer; to be distressed, worried, troubled IV to cause pain (ه to s.o.), hurt (ه s.o.); to torment, torture, agonize (ه s.o.)
مض maḍḍ pain, torment, torture, anguish, agony; painful, burning, stinging, smarting
 مضض maḍaḍ pain, suffering, torment, torture, anguish, agony, affliction, distress; sour milk │ مضض على unwillingly, reluctantly, grudgingly
مضاض muḍāḍ brackish water, brine, salt water
مضاضة maḍāḍa agony, torture
ممض mumiḍḍ agonizing, tormenting
مضر maḍara, maḍura u and maḍira a (maḍr,
maḍar, مضور muḍūr) to turn sour (milk)
مضر maḍir and ماضر māḍir sour (milk)
مضر لغة lugat muḍara the language of Mudar, the Arabic language
مضغ maḍaga a u (maḍg) to chew (ھ s.th.) │ الكالم مضغ (kalām) to slur, speak indistinctly
مضغ maḍg chewing, mastication
مضغة muḍga pl. مضغ muḍag s.th. to be chewed; bite, bit, morsel; small chunk of meat; O embryo; O chewing gum │ مضغة طيبة (ṭayyiba) titbit; األفواه في مضغة جعله (ja‘alahū muḍgatan) to make s.o. the talk of the town, send tongues wagging about s.o.
مضاغة muḍāga s.th. chewed, chew, quid
مضمض maḍmaḍa to rinse
مضى maḍā i (muḍīy) to go away, leave, depart; to make off, decamp, abscond; with ب; to take s.th. away, remove s.th.; to pass, elapse, go by, expire, run out (time); to advance, progress (في in); to proceed (في in or with s.th., also ب), continue (في, also ب, s.th., to do s.th.), go on (في doing s.th.); to pursue, practice, exercise (في s.th., also مھنة في fī mihnatin a profession); to penetrate deeper, enter deeper, go deeper ( في into s.th.); to 912 bring to an end, wind up, terminate, conclude, accomplish, carry out, execute, perform (على s.th.); (with imperf.) to set out to do s.th., proceed to do s.th.; -- (مضاء maḍā’) to be sharp, cut (sword) │ سبيله مضى (sabīlahū) to pass away, die; لسبيله مضى (li-sabīlihī) do.; مضى البيع على (bai‘) to conclude a bargain; مضى شھور ذلك على (šuhūrun) months have passed since then; كالمه في مضى (kalāmihī) to go on talking; مضى ما مضى let bygones
be bygones! no more of that! مضى فيما (fī- mā) or الزمان من مضى فيما (zamān) formerly, previously, heretofore, once, before, in the past; حتى قليل غير يمض لم lam yamḍi gairu qalīlin ḥlattā it did not take long until ..., before long ...; مضت سنة من min sanatin maḍat one year ago; فقال ومضى and he went on to say, and he added II to make pass, cause to go by; to spend, pass (ھ time, في with s.th.) IV to spend, p (. time); to carry out, execute, perform, accomplish, conclude, terminate, wind up, bring to an end (ھ s.th.); to pass, put behind o.s. (ھ examination); to undersign, sign (ھ s.th.) │ على امره امضي (amrahu) to throw one’s full support behind s.th., endorse s.th. wholeheartedly
مضي muḍīy departure, leave; passing; lapse, elapsing, expiration (of a period of time); continuation (في of s.th.); deeper penetration, deeper insight (في into); carrying out, execution, pursuit (في of an intention, of a plan) │ مضي m. al-mudda lapse of time, superannuation; بمضي التمسك المدة (tamassuk) usucapion, prescription (jur.); الزمن مضي على (m. iz-zaman) lastingly, for long, permanently; في المضي الحرب (ḥarb) the continuation of the war
مضاء maḍā’ sharpness, keenness; penetration, sagacity, acute discernment; energy │ المدة مضاء strength of purpose, resolution, determination, energy, go
امضى amḍā sharper, more incisive, more effective
تمضية tamḍiya execution, performance, accomplishment, completion; spending, passing (of time) │ الوقت تمضية t. al.waqt pastime
إمضاء imḍā’ realization, execution, accomplishment, completion; signing, signature │ اإلمضاء صاحب the undersigned
ماض māḍin pl. مواض mawāḍin sharp, keen, cutting; acute, penetrating, incisive, effective; energetic; past, bygone; الماضي the past; past tense, perfect, preterit (gram.) │ العزيمة ماضي resolute, determined; الماضي الشھر (šahr) last month
ممض mumḍin signer, signatory
ممضى mumḍan undersigned, signed
 مط maṭṭa u (maṭṭ) to expand by pulling, stretch, draw out (ھ s.th.); to draw tight, tighten, tauten (ھ s.th.) II to expand, stretch (ھ s.th.); to scold, revile, abuse (ه s.o.) V to expand; to stretch; to distend, widen, spread, lengthen; to be capable of extension or lengthening, be expandable, stretchable, elastic; to be rubberlike
مط maṭṭ expansion, extension, stretching, distention, lengthening, drawing out
مطاط maṭṭāṭ expandable, extensible, stretchable, elastic; dilatory; rubbery, rubberlike; rubber; caoutchouc
تمطط tamaṭṭu□ expandability, extensibility, elasticity
مطر maṭara u to rain (السماء مطرت maṭarat is-samā’ it rained); to shower with rain (ه s.o.; of the sky); to pour out (ب ه over s.o. s.th.), shower, douse (ه ب s.o. with); to do, render (ه s.o., بخير bi-kairin a good turn, a favor); to run swiftly (horse), speed away IV to rain (of the sky); to cause (ھ s.th.) to rain (على upon); to shower (ه ب s.o. with 913 or على ھ upon
s.o. upon ھ على or ب ه( heap s.th.), s.o. امطره or (wābilan) امطر عليه وابال │ s.th.)
منه بوابل (bi-wābilin) he showered him with a hail of (e.g., stones), with a rain of (e.g., blows), with a flood of (e.g., abuses, threats), etc. X to ask for rain; to ask (من or ه s.o.) a favor; to wish (ھ for s.th.), desire (ھ s.th.); to invoke, call down (ھ على upon s.o. s.th.)
مطر maṭar pl. امطار amṭār rain │ محطة األمطر لرصد maḥaṭṭa li-raṣd al·a. pluvio- metrical station
مطرة mṭra, maṭara pl. -āt downpour, rain shower
مطر maṭir and مطير maṭīr rainy, abounding in rain
ممطر mimṭar and ممطرة mimṭara pl.
مماطر mamāṭir  raincoat
ماطر māṭir, rainy, abounding in rain
ممطر mumṭir rainy, abounding in rain │ ممطرة مواسم rainy seasons, periods of rain
مطرن maṭrana to raise to the rank of metropolitan or archbishop, consecrate as metropolitan or archbishop (ه s.o.) II
tamaṭrana to be instated or consecrated as metropolitan (Chr.)
مطران muṭrān, maṭrān, miṭrān pl. مطارنة maṭārina, مطارين maṭārīn  metropolitan, archbishop (Chr.)
مطرنة maṭrana dignity or office of a metropolitan, metropolitanate, archiepiscopate (Chr.)
pl. muṭrānīya مطرانية maṭranīya, مطرنية
-āt diocese of a metropolitan, archbishopric, archdiocese (Chr.)
مطق V to smack one’s lips
مطل maṭala u (maṭl) to draw out, lengthen, extend, stretch (ھ s.th.); to stretch (ھ a rope); to hammer, forge, shape by hammering (ھ iron); to postpone, defer, delay; to put off (ه ب s.o. with) III to tarry, temporize, take one’s time; to put off (ه ب
s.o. with)
مطول maṭūl deferring, delaying, procrastinating, tardy, dilatory, slow
مطيلة maṭīla pl. مطائل maṭā’il  wrought iron
مماطلة mumāṭala postponement, deferment, procrastination, delay
مطو) مطا) maṭā u (maṭw) to quicken one’s pace, hurry, walk fast IV to mount (ھ an animal); to ride (ھ on an animal) V to stretch o.s., loll; to stretch (ب s.th., one’s body, one’s limbs); to walk, proudly, strut, swagger VIII to mount (ھ an animal); to board (ھ a vehicle), get in (ھ), get aboard (ھ); to ride (ھ on an animal, in a vehicle)
مطوة maṭwa hour, time, moment
مطية maṭīya pl. مطايا maṭāyā, مطي maṭīy mount, riding animal; expedient, means to an end, instrument, tool
مع ma’a (prep.) with, simultaneously with, together with, accompanied by, in the company of; in the estimation, eyes, or opinion of; in spite of, despite; toward, in relation to; معا ma’an together; at the same time, simultaneously; with one another │ ان مع although; ان إال – ان ومع wa-ma‘a anna -- illā anna although -- nevertheless, to be sure -- but ..., it is true -- but ; ذلك مع or ھذا مع in spite of it, nevertheless, notwithstanding, still; ھذا كل مع in spite of
 all that; غنيا كونه مع (kaunihī ganīyan) although he is rich, for all his being rich, rich as he is; الحكومة مع ليس (laisa) he is not for the government, he doesn’t side with the government; الحائط مع along the wall; معه كان it was with him, he had it with him; معكم ما what do you have with you? what have you brought along? what’s 914 up your sleeves? ان في معي الست (alasta) don’t you also think that ...? wouldn’t you share my view that معه القسوة وسائل استعمل ista‘mala wasā’il l-qaswati ma‘ahū he brought harsh measures to bear on him
معية ma‘īya company; escort; suite, retinue, entourage, attendants │ في) بمعية فالن (معية in the company of so-and-so; ھذا بمعية herein enclosed, herewith
معج V to wind, meander
مع pass. mu‘ida to have a gastric ailment, suffer from dyspepsia, have a stomachache
معدة ma‘ida, mi‘da pl. معد mi’ad
stomach
معدى ma‘dī, mi‘dī of or pertaining to the stomach, gastric, stomachic │ معدية امراض gastric diseases; معدية حمى (ḥummā) gastric fever
ممعود mam‘ūd suffering from a gastric disease, dyspeptic
معر ma‘ira a (ma‘ar) to fall out (hair) IV to become poor, impoverished, be reduced to poverty V = I
معار ma‘ār (eg.) braggart, braggadocio, swaggerer
معز ma‘z, ma‘az (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. امعز am‘uz,
معيز ma‘īz goat
ماعز mā‘iz pl. مواعز mawā‘iz  goat
معاز ma‘‘āz goatherd
معس ma‘asa a (ma‘s) to rub (ھ s.th.); to squash, crush (ھ s.th.)
معض ma‘aḍa a (ma‘ḍ) and VIII to be annoyed (على by), be angry (من at), resent (من s.th.)
امتعاض imti‘āḍ anger, resentment, annoyance, displeasure; excitement, agitation
ممتعض mumta‘iḍ annoyed, vexed, angry; upset, excited
معط ma‘aṭa a (ma‘ṭ) to tear out, pull out, pluck out (ھ hair, feathers)
معطاء f. am‘aṭ , امعط and ma‘iṭ معط
ma‘ṭā‘, pl. معط mu‘ṭ hairless, bald معك ma‘aka a (ma‘k) to rub (ھ s.th.) معكرونه ma‘karūna macaroni
 معمعة ma‘ma‘a pl. معامع ma‘āmi‘  confusion, jumble, mess, tohubohu; tumult, uproar; turmoil; pl. wars, battles
معمعان ma‘ma‘ān raging, roar (of a storm), turmoil, thick (of a battle), height, climax (of heat and cold) │ الصيف معمعان
معمعان الشتاء summer; high aṣ-ṣaif m.
deepest winter
 معمعي IV to apply o.s. assiduously, devote all one’s efforts (في to s.th.); to be keen, intent (في on), be eager (في for); to examine closely, study carefully, scrutinize (في s.th.); to go to extremes (في in s.th.), overdo, carry too far (في s.th.) │ في النظر امعن (naẓara) to fix one’s eyes on s.th., regard s.th. attentively, examine s.th. closely, scrutinize s.th. V to become engrossed or absorbed, bury o.s. (في in), regard attentively, examine carefully (في s. th.), look closely (في at s.o., at s.th.), scrutinize (في s.o., s.th.)
ماعون mā‘ūn pl. مواعين mawā‘īn implement, utensil, instrument; vessel, receptacle, container; (coll.) implements, utensils, gear; (syr.) ream of paper
mawā‘īn  مواعين -āt, pl. mā‘ūna ماعونة
(eg.) lighter, barge
امعان im‘ān and النظر امعان i. an-naẓar close examination, careful study, scrutiny (في of s.th.); امعان devotion (في to s.th.), care, carefulness, assiduity, diligence, attentiveness, attention 915
تمعن tama‘‘un close examination, careful study, scrutiny; care, carefulness │ بتمعن carefully
معو) معا) ma‘ā u (معاء ma‘ā’) to mew, miaow, (cat)
  معى mi‘an, ma‘y and معاء mi‘ā’ pl. امعاء am‘ā’, امعية am‘īya gut; intestines, bowels, entrails │ الدقيقة األمعاء the small intestine; الغليظ المعى the large intestine
 معوي mi‘awī of or pertaining to the intestines, intestinal; enteric │ المعوية الحمى (ḥummā) typhoid fever, enteric fever, abdominal typhus
مع see ma‘īya معية 
مغاث mugāt (eg.) root of Glossostemon Bruguieri (bot.)
مغر magar and مغرة mugra reddish, russet color
امغر amgar  reddish brown, russet مغربة magraba (mor.) Moroccanization مغص magṣa to cause gripes; pass. mugiṣa
(mag.) to have gripes or colic, suffer from colic
مغص magṣ, magaṣ and مغيص magīṣ, gripes; colic │ كلوى مغص (kulwī) renal colic
ممغوص mamgūṣ, suffering from colic; having gripes
مغط magaṭa a (magṭ) to stretch, extend, expand, draw, out II do.
متمغط mutamaggiṭ stretchable, elastic (rubber); tough, viscous, ropy, sticky
مغطس magṭasa to magnetize, make magnetic, subject to magnetic induction (ھ s.th.) II tamagṭasa to be magnetized, become magnetic
مغطسة magṭasa magnetism
ممغطس mumagṭas magnetized, magnetic
al- k. خشب المغنى al-mugna, kašab خشب المغنة (wood) mahogany mugnā
مغنط magnaṭa to magnetize, subject to magnetic induction (ھ s.th.)
مغنطيس mignaṭīs, magnaṭīs magnet │ O
electromagnet (kahrabā’ī) مغنطيس كھربائي
مغناطيس mignāṭīs, magnāṭīs. magnet; magnetism
مغنطيسي mignaṭīsī magnetic; hypnotic
مغناطيسية and mignāṭīsīya مغنطيسية
magnetism
مغنيسيا magnīsiyā magneoio
المغول al-mugūl the Mongols; the Moguls │ بالد المغول Mongolia
مغولي mugūlī Mongolian
مقت maqata u (maqt) to detest, abhor, loathe, hate (ه s.o., ھ s.th.); -- maquta u (مقاتة maqāta) to be abominable, detestable, loathsme, hated, odious II maqata; to make (ه s.o.) hateful (الى to s.o.), make s.o. (الى) loathe (ه s.o.)
مقت maqt hate, hatred, detestation, loathing, aversion, disgust ; hateful, odious
مقيت maqīt and ممقوت mamqūt hated, detested; hateful, odious; detestable, abominable, loathsome, repugnant, disgusting
مقدونس maqdūnis parsley
مقدوني maqdūnī Macedonian (adj. and n.)
مقع maqa’a a (maq’) to drink avidly, toss down (ھ s.th.) VIII pass. umtuqi’a to turn pale
ممقتع mumtaqa’ pale, pallid, wan, sallow
مقل maqala u (maql) to look (ه at s.o.), eye, regard (ه s.o.)
مقلة muqla pl. مقل muqal eye; eyeball │ العين مقلة m. al-’ain eyeball 916
□ مقانق maqāniq (= نقانق) small mutton sausages (syr.)
مكة makka  (usually followed by the epithet
المكرمة al-mukarrama) Mecca
مكي makkī Meccan (adj. and n.)
makākik  مكاكيك pl. makkūk مكوك
drinking cup; shuttle
mawākik  مواكيك pl. mākūk ماكوك
drinking cup; shuttle
مكث makata u (makt, مكوث mukūt) to remain, abide, stay, live, dwell, reside (ب in a place)
مكث makt and مكوث mukūt remaining, staying, lingering, abiding; stay, sojourn
كوى see مكوجي
مكدام (Engl.) makadām macadam
مكدوني makdūnī Macedonian (adj. and n.)
مكدونيا makdūniyā Macedonia
 مكر makara u (makr) to deceive, delude, cheat, dupe, gull, double-cross (ب s.o.) III to try to deceive (ه s.o.)
مكر makr cunning, craftiness, slyness, wiliness, double-dealing, deception, trickery
مكرة makra ruse, artifice, stratagem, wile, trick, dodge
مكار makkār and مكور makūr cunning, sly, crafty, wily, shrewd, artful; sly, crafty person, impostor, swindler
ماكر mākir pl. مكرة makara sly, cunning, wily
مكروب mikrūb pl. -āt, مكاريب makārīb  microbe
مكررونه makarūna macaroni
مكس makasa i (mail) and II to collect taxes III to haggle, bargain (ه with s.o.)
مكس maks pl. مكوس mukūs tax, specif., excise or sales tax; toll, custom, duty, impost; market dues │ المكوس دار custom- house
مكاس makkās tax collector
المكسيك al-maksīk Mexico
المكى Mukalla (seaport in Aden Protectorate, chief town of Hadhramaut)
 مكن makuna u (مكانة makāna) to be or become strong; to become influential, gain influence, have influence (عند with s.o.), have power II to make strong or firm, consolidate, strengthen, cement, establish firmly, deepen (ھ s.th.); to lend weight (ھ to s.th.); to put down or set down firmly ( ھ s.th.), give (ھ s.th.) a firm stance; to put (ه s.o.) in a position (من to do s.th.), give (ه s.o.) the possibility (من to do s.th.), enable (ه من s.o. to do s.th.), make possible (ه من for s.o. s.th.); to place (من s.th.) in s.o.’s (ه) hands; to furnish. provide (ه من s.o. with); to give or lend a firm position (ل to s.o. to s.th.); to give power (ل في to s.o. over) IV to enable (ه من s.o. to do s.th.); to be possible, feasible (ه for s.o.) │ يمكنه yumkinuhū he can (ان do s.th.); ان يمكن it is possible that ...; it may be that ...,
possibly ..., perhaps ..., maybe …; ما اكثر يمكن (aktara) as much as possible; يمكن ال it is impossible V to have or gain influence, weight, or prestige (عند with s.o.), have or
gain power; to be native, indigenous, resident; to gain ground; to spread; to be consolidated, firmly established; to consolidate, strengthen, gain in strength; to seize (من on s.th.), possess o.s., take possession (من of s.th.); to have command or mastery (من of s.th.), command, muter ( من s.th.); to be in a position, be able (من to do s.th.), be capable (من of), have the power (من to do s.th.) X to consolidate, strengthen, deepen, become firmly established, establish itself; to seize (من on s.th.), possess o.s., take possession (من of); to have 917 command or mastery (من of s.th.), command, master (من s.th.); to be able (من to do s.th.), be capable (من of)
مكنة mukna, makina power, ability, capacity, capability, faculty; possibility; strength, firmness, solidity, intensity, force, vigor
كون see مكانة and امكنة, اماكن pl. مكان strong, mukanā’  مكناء pl. makīn مكين
firm, solid; firmly established, unshakable; deep-seated, deep-rooted, deeply ingrained, inveterate (feeling); influential, distinguished, of note, of rank, respected; powerful, potent
متمكن see amkan  امكن
تمكين tamkīn strengthening, consolidation, cementation; deepening, intensification; fixation, establishment; enabling, enablement, capacitation; livery of seizing, investiture (Isl. Law)
امكان imkān power, capacity, capability; faculty, ability; possibility │ اإلمكان بقدر bi- qadri l-i. or اإلمكان قدر على as much as possible, as far as possible; اإلمكان عدم ‘adam al-i. impossibility; اإلمكان عند when (if) possible, possibly; ان امكانه في it is in his power, he is in a position to ...; في ھو اإلمكان it is in the realm of possibility; ليس اإلمكان في it is impossible, unthinkable, inconceivable
امكانية imkānīya pl. -āt possibility; O potential (phys.)
تمكن tamakkun power, authority, control, mastery, command; ability, capability,
 faculty; restraint, self-control, self- possession (also النفس من تمكن)
ماكن mākin strong, firm, solid, lasting, enduring
ممكن mumkin possible; thinkable, conceivable │ ممكن غير impossible; من ان المكن possibly, perhaps, maybe
ممكنات mumkināt possibilities
متمكن mutamakkin an adept, a proficient, a master; strengthened, cemented; firmly established, firmly fixed; consolidated; deep-rooted, deep- seated, deeply ingrained, inveterate; lasting, enduring; declinable (gram.) │ امكن متمكن (amkan ) declinable with nunnation, triptote (gram.); امكن غير متمكن (gairu amkana) declinable in two cases, diptote (gram.); متمكن غير indeclinable (gram.); جلسته في متمكن (jalsatihī) firmly seated
مكائن and -āt pl. mākīna ماكينة and makina مكنة  
makā’in  machine
مكنى makanī mechanical
كوى see مكوجي
 مل malla (1  pers. perf. maliltu) a (ملل malal, مالل malāl, ماللة malāla) to be or become weary, tired, bored, impatient; to tire, become tired (ھ of s.th.), become fed-up ( ھ with) │ يمل ال indefatigable, untiring, unflagging IV to be tiresome, irksome, wearisome, boring, tedious, vexatious; to vex, annoy, irritate (على or ه s.o.); (= املى) to dictate (ه على s.th. to s.o.) V to be wearied, fed-up; to be bored; to be restless, fidgety; to embrace a religion (ملة millatan) VIII to embrace a religion (ملة millatan)
مل mall weary, tired, fed-up; bored
ملة malla hot ashes, live embers
ملة milla pl. ملل milal religious community; religion, creed, faith, confession, denomination
ملى millī religious, confessional, denominational │ ملي مجلس (majlis) court of justice of a religious minority (in Egypt abolished since 1956)
ملة mulla pl. ملل mulal basting stitch, tacking stitch; spring mattress
ملل malal and مالل malāl tiredness, boredom, ennui; listlessness, weariness; annoyance, irritation, vexation 918
مالل mulāl morbid unrest, restlessness fidgetiness, feverishness
ماللة malāla weariness, boredom; impatience; ennui, tedium
ملول malūl tired, wearied, bored; weary, fed-up, disgusted
ملى mullā bread baked in hot ashes مملول mamlūl offensive, disgusting ممل mumill tiresome, tedious, boring,
wearisome, irksome, loathsome, disagreeable
 مل mill pl. -āt (formerly) the smallest monetary unit in Palestine and Jordan, 1/1000 of a Palestinian pound
مأل mala’a a (ملء mal’, مألة mal’a, mil’a) to fill, fill up (ب or من or ھ ھ s.th. with); to fill out (ھ a form, a blank); to take up, fill, occupy (ھ space); to fill (ھ a vacancy) │ الدھر مأل (dahra) his (its) fame spread far and wide; الساعة مأل (sā‘ata) to wind up a watch or clock; بالھواء شدقيه مأل (šidqaihi bi- l-hawā’) to puff one’s cheek.; العين مأل (‘aina) to satisfy completely, please; مأل بالشكوى الفضاء (faḍā’a bi-š-šakwā) to fill the air with complaints, voice loud laments;
ب فاه مأل (fāhu) to talk big about ..., shoot off one’s mouth about ...; -- ملئ mali’a to be or become filled, filled up, full, replete III to help, assist, support, back up (ه على
s.o. in), side (ه with s.o.); to make common cause, join forces (ه على with s.o. against) IV to fill (ھ s.th., also a vacancy) V to till, become full; to be filled (ھ or من with), be full (ھ or من of) VIII to fill, become full; to be filled (glass; pass.); to be filled (من ھ، or ب with s.th., ھ also with a feeling), be full (من ھ، or ب of, ھ also of a feeling); to fill (ھ s.th.); to fill up (ھ s.th.); to imbue, fill (ه s.o., ھ with a feeling)
ملء mal’ filling (also, e.g., of vacancies); filling out
ملء mil’ pl. امالء amlā’ filling, quantity which fills s.th., fill; quantity contained in s.th. │ الكبرياء اھابه ملء m. ihābihī l- kibriyā’u he is all pride and arrogance; ملء
 بطنه m. baṭnihī as much as one can eat, one’s fill; القدح ملء m. qadaḥin a cupful;  اليد ملء m. al-yad a handful; كسائه ملء m. kisā’ihī corpulent fat; الفم بملء bi-m. il-fam in a loud voice; فيه بملء bi-mil’i fīhi with a ring of deep conviction (with verbs like “say”, “declare”, “exclaim”, etc.); loudly, at the top of one’s voice or one’s lungs (with verbs like “shout”, “cry”, etc.); ضحك شدقيه (ملء) بملء ḍaḥika bi-mil’i (or mil’a) šidqaihj to grin from ear to ear; بصوت قال الشفقة ملؤه (bi-ṣautin mil’uhū ā-šafaqatu) he said in a voice full of mercy ...; ملء لي
في الحرية (m. ul-ḥurrīya) I have complete freedom to ..., I am completely at liberty to ...; ملء (mauqilan mil'uhil
I-ilium) he ....umed a posture that w... all determination; حياتي ملء انت (ḥayātī)
you are all my life; جفنيه ملء ينام (mil’a jafnaihi) he is sound asleep, he sleeps the sleep of the just
مأل mala’ pl. امالء amlā’ crowd, gathering, assembly, congregation; audience; (general) public; council of elders, notables, grandees │ المأل على publicly, in public; العالم مأل على (m.
il-‘ālam) for everyone to see, before all the world; األعلى المأل (a‘lā) the heavenly host, the angels
مالءة mulā’a, □ مالية milāya pl. -āt wrap worn by Egyptian women; sheet, bed sheet
مليئ مليء، malī’ full (ب of), filled, replete (ب with); bulging, swelling (ب with); plump; stout, fat, corpulent, obese; rich, abounding (ب in); well-to-do, wealthy; solvent │ البدن مليء m. al-badan stout, fat, corpulent 919
pl. مآلنة or mal’ā ملألى f. mal’ān, مآلن
مالء milā’ full, filled, replete; plump, fat
مماألة mumāla’a partiality, bias; collaboration (pol.)
امالء imlā’ filling (also, e.g., of a vacancy)
امتالء imtilā’ repletion, fullness; full, round form, plumpness; bulkiness; fatness, stoutness, corpulence
مملوء mamlū’ filled, filled up; imbued; loaded
ممالئ mumāli’ partial, biased, prejudiced; collaborator (pol.)
ممتلئ mumtali’ full, filled, filled up, replete │ الجسم ممتلئ m. al-jism stout, fat, corpulent
مالريا malāriyā malaria
ماليو malāyū, الماليو جزر juzur al-m. the Malayan Archipelago
ملج malaja u (malj) to suck (ھ the mother’s breast) VIII to suck
مالج mālaj pl. موالج mawālij  trowel
ملح malaḥa u a and maluḥa u (ملوح mulūḥ, ملوحة mulāḥa, مالحة malāḥa) to be or become salt(y); -- maluḥa u (مالحة malāḥa, ملوحة mulūḥa) to be beautiful, handsome, pretty, comely, nice, elegant II to salt, season with salt (ھ s.th.); to salt away, salt down, preserve with salt, com, cure (ھ s.th.) IV to be salt(y) X to find (ھ s.th.) beautiful, pretty, nice, or witty
ملح milḥ m. and f., pl. امالح amlāḥ, مالح milāḥ salt; gunpowder; witticism, wittiness, wit, esprit │ انكليزي ملح bitter salt, Epsom salt; البارود ملح m. al-bārūd saltpeter; gunpowder; النشادر ملح m. an- nušādir sal ammoniac, ammonium chloride; معدنية امالح (ma‘dinīya) mineral salts
ملحي milhī salt, salty, saline
ملحة milḥa bond, obligation, commitment, covenant
ملحة mulḥa pl. ملح mulaḥ funny story, anecdote, bon mot, witticism
مالح mallāḥ sailor, seaman, mariner; (mar.) ghetto of Moroccan cities
مالحة malāḥa beauty, grace, gracefulness; elegance; kindness, kindliness, friendliness, amiability; saltiness, salt taste, saltness, salinity
مالحة mallāḥa pl. -āt salina, saline spring; saltern, saltworks, salt mine; saltcellar
مالحة milāḥa navigation, shipping │ تجارية مالحة (tijārīya) mercantile shipping, maritime transportation; جوية مالحة (jawwīya) aviation; داخلية مالحة (dākilīya)
 inland navigation; نھرية مالحة (nahrīya) river traffic; للمالحة صالح navigable
مالحي milāḥī navigational, shipping, marine, maritime, nautical
ملوحة mulāḥa saltiness, salt taste
مليح malīḥ pl. مالح millāḥ, امالح amlāḥ salt, salty, briny, salted; pretty, handsome, comely; beautiful; nice, pleasant, agreeable; witty │ (eg.) مليحة علقة (‘alqa) a sound beating
املوحة umlūḥa pl. اماليح amālīḥ  joke, anecdote
مملحة mamlaḥa pl. ممالح mamāliḥ  salina; saltern, saltworks; saline spring; saltcellar
تمليح tamlīḥ salting, salting down, preservation in salt, corning, curing
مالح māliḥ salt, salty, briny
موالح mawāliḥ  (pl. of مالحة māliḥa, citrus fruits; (syr.) salted nuts, peanuts, almonds, etc.
مملوح mamlūḥ salted, salty 920
مملح mumallaḥ salted; salted down, corned, cured
مستملح mustamlaḥ brilliant, witty, bright, clever, interesting
 ملخ malaka a (malk) to pull out, tear out (ھ s.th.); to wrench, dislocate, luxate (ھ a joint) VIII to pull out, extract (ھ s.th.)
مليخ malīk tasteless, insipid
 ملوخية mulūlkīya Jew’s mallow (Corchorus olitorius; bot.) cultivated as a pot herb; a thick soup made of this herb (eg., syr.)
ملد malida a (malad) to be tender (esp., twig)
اماليد amalīd  tender twigs
املد amlad , f. ملداء maldā’ tender, flexible
ملس malisa a and malusa u (مالسة malāsa, ملوسة mulūsa) to be smooth, level, even II to make smooth, to smooth, level, even (ھ s.th.); to make slippery (ھ s.th.); to pass the hand, brush (with the hand) ( على over), stroke, caress (على s.th.) V to become smooth; to glide, slide, slip; to grope; to slip away, escape VII (also املس
immalasa) to become smooth; to glide, slide, slip; to slip away; to escape
ملس malas (eg.) a thin outer garment;
على silk fabric for women’s dresses
ملس malis smooth, sleek
مالسة malāsa smoothness
ملس pl. malsā’ , ملساء f.  , amlas املس
muls smooth, sleek
ملص maliṣa a (malaṣ) to glide, slide, slip; to slip away, escape; to disengage o.s., free o.s., (عن من، from an obligation), rid o.s. ( عن من، of) V to rid o.s. (عن of), shirk, dodge, evade (من s.th.)
ملص maliṣ smooth, sleek, slippery
مليص malīṣ smooth, seleek, slippery; miscarried fetus, stillborn child
تملص tamalluṣ slipping away, escaping, escape
 ملط malaṭa u (malṭ) to plaster with mud or mortar (ھ a wall); to shave off (ھ hair) II to mortar, plaster (ھ a wall)
عريان ملط │ naked stark (eg.) malṭ ملط
(‘uryān) stark naked
ملط milṭ pl. امالط amlāt, ملوط mulūṭ dishonorable, discreditable; scoundrel │ ملط خلط kilṭ milṭ or kalṭ malṭ pell-mell, in confusion
مالط milāṭ pl. ملط muluṭ mortar
mulṭ ملط pl. amlaṭ املط and malīṭ مليط
hairless
  مالطة malṭa Malta
مالطي malṭī Maltese (adj. and n.)
ملق maliqa a (malaq) to flatter (ه s.o.) U = I; to even, level, plane (ھ ھ s.th.) III = I IV to become poor, impoverished, be reduced to poverty V to flatter (ل الى، or ه s.o.)
ملق maliq and مالق mallāq flatterer, adulator
ملق malaqa pl. -āt, املق amlaq (eg.) Egyptian mile, league, the distance of approximately one hour’s walk
مملقة mimlaqa planer, leveler; roller
تمليق tamlīq and تملق tamalluq flattery, adulation
 ملك malaka i (malk, mulk, milk) to take in possession, take over, acquire (ھ s.th.), seize, lay hands (ھ on), possess o.s., take possession, lay hold (ھ of); to possess, own, have (ھ s.th.), be the owner (ھ of); to dominate, control (ھ s.th.): to be master (ھ of); to role, reign, exercise power or authority, hold sway, lord it (على or ھ over); to be capable (ھ of), be 921 equal ( ھ to); to be able, be in a position (ان or ھ to do s.th.) │ الغيظ ملكه (gaiẓ) anger overwhelmed him, got the better of him; مشاعره جميع عليه ملك (jamī‘a mašā‘irihī) to dominate s.o.’s every thought and deed, be uppermost in s.o.’s mind; حسه عليه ملك (ḥissahū) to take possession of s.o.’s feelings; لبه عليه ملك (lubbahū) to preoccupy s.o.’s heart; نفسه عليه ملك (nafsahū) to lay hold of s.o.’s soul, dominate s.o.’s thinking, affect s.o. deeply, stir up, arouse, excite s.o.; على ملك امرھا نفسه (amrahā) to have o.s. under control, keep one’s temper; من العينين ملك البكاء (‘ainaini, bukā’) to hold back the tears; نفسه ملك (nafsahū) to control o.s., restrain o.s.; ان يملك لم he could not refrain from ..., he couldn’t help it, he had to ...; ما يمينه (يملك) ملكت (yamīnuhū) his fortune, his property, his possessions II and IV to make (ه s.o.) the owner; to put (ه s.o.) in possession (ھ of), transfer (ه to s.o.) ownership (ھ of); to transfer, assign, make over, convey (ه ھ to s.o. s.th.); to make (ه s.o.) king or sovereign (على over) V to take in possession, take over, appropriate, acquire (ھ s.th.), take possession (ھ of s.th., ه of s.o.), seize, lay hands (ھ on s.th.), lay hold (ھ of s.th.); to possess, own, have (ھ s.th.), be in possession (ھ of); to become king or sovereign (على over); to become prevalent, become fixed, take root (habit) VI to gain control (ھ over a feeling, نفسه nafsahū over o.s.); to control o.s., restrain o.s., hold back; to refrain, keep (عن from s.th.) │ عن تمالك ما he couldn’t help (doing s.th.), he couldn’t refrain from ... VIII to possess, own, have (ھ s.th.); to gain, win (ھ s.th.); to acquire ( ھ s.th.) │ الشيء نواصي امتلك (nawāṣiya š- šai’) to b. master of s.th., rule over s.th. X to appropriate (ھ s.th.), take possession (ھ of); to dominate, control (ھ s.th.); to
possess, own, have (ھ s.th.); to master (ھ s.th.)
ملك mulk rule, reign, supreme authority, dominion, domination, dominance, sway, power; sovereignty, kingship, royalty; monarchy; tenure, holding, right of possession, possessory right, ownership
ملك mill: pl. امالك amlāk property, possessions, goods and chattels, fortune, wealth; estate; landed property, real estate; pl. possessions (= colonies); lands, landed property, estates │ اميرية امالك (amīrīya) or الحكومة امالك government lands; ثابت ملك landed property, real property, real estate, realty, immovables; منقول ملك personal estate, personal property, personality, movables; مبنية امالك (mabnīya) developed lots, real estate developments; صاحب األمالك ذو األمالك، landowner; اميري ملك (amīrī) government property; مطلق ملك (muṭlaq) general property, fee simple (absolute) (Isl. Law); شائع ملك joint property, joint tenancy, co-ownership
amlāk امالك mulūk, ملوك pl. malik ملك
king, sovereign, monarch
ملكة malika pl. -āt queen │ الجمال ملكة m. al-jamāl beauty queen
ملك حارس │ angel )مألك (for malak ملك
guardian angel
ملكي mulkī posessory, possessive, proprietary; civilian, civil (as opposed to military) │ ملكية بدلة (badla) civilian clothes; ملكي موظف (muwaẓẓaf) civil servant
ملكي malakī royal, kingly, regal; monarchic, sovereign; monarchist; angelic
ملكية malakīya monarchy, kingship, royalty
ملكية milkīya pl. -āt property; ownership (jur.) │ الكبرى الملكية (kubrā) large landed property; الملكية نزع naz‘ al-m. expropriation, dispossession 922
ملكة malaka pl. -āt trait of character, natural disposition, aptitude, bent; gift, faculty, talent, knack
ملكوت malakūt realm, kingdom, empire; kingship, royalty, sovereignty │ ملكوت السماوات m. as-samāwāt the Kingdom of Heaven (Chr.)
 ملكوتي malakūtī divine, heavenly
مالك malāk, milāk foundation, basis, fundament, essential prerequisite
مالك milāk (tun.) betrothal, engagement; engagement present (of the fiancé to the prospective bride)
ملوكي mulukī royal, kingly, regal; monarchic; monarchist
مالك mallākīya monarchic rule, monarchism, kingship, royalty; monarchist leaning
مالك mallāk pl. -ūn owner, proprietor; landowner, landholder, landed proprietor
│ الملكين كبار kibār al-m. large landowners
مالكي mallākī private
مليك malīk pl. ملكاء mulakā’ king; possessor, owner, proprietor
مليكة malīka queen
مملكة mamlaka pl. ممالك mamālik  kingdom, empire, state, country; royal power, sovereignty
تمليك tamlīk transfer of ownership, conveyance of property, alienation
تملك tamalluk taking possession, occupancy, seizure; possession; right or possession, possessory right, tenure, holding; domination, control, mastery
تمالك tamāluk self-control
امتالك imtilāk taking possession, occupancy, seizure; possession; right or possession, possessory right, tenure, holding; domination, control, mastery │ النفس امتالك imt. an-nafs self-control
امتالك imtilāk pl. -āt acquisition; appropriation, taking possession, occupancy, seizure
مالك mālik pl. مالك mullāk, ملك mullak reigning, ruling; owning, possessing, holding; owner, proprietor, master, possessor, holder │ الحزين مالك heron (zool.)
مالكي mālikī Malikite, belonging to the Malikite school of theology; a Maliki
المالكية al-mālikīya the Malikite school of theology
مملوك mamlūk owned (ل by), in possession (ل of), belonging (ل to); (pl. مماليك mamālīk ) white slave, mameluke; Mameluke │ مملوك غير incapable of individual possession, (res) extra commercium (Isl. Law)
مملك mumallik assignor, transferor, conveyer, alienator
ممتلك mumtalak owned, in possession; pl. ممتلكات mumtalakāt property; estates, landed property; possessions, dependencies, colonies │  اميرية ممتلكات (amīrīya) government property; الممتلكات المستقلة (mustaqilla) the Dominions
ململ malmala to hurry, hasten; to make restless, make fidgety (ه s.o.) II tamalmala to murmur; to mumble, mumble into one’s beard; to grumble, be disgruntled, be angry; to be restlessness, fidgety, nervous; to twitch nervously; to be or become wavering, uncertain
ململة malmala and تململ tamalmul unrest, restlessness, fidgetiness, nervousness
ملنخوليا malakōliyā melancholia
 ملو) مال) malā u (malw) to walk briskly, run II to make (ھ s.o.) enjoy (ھ s.th.) for a long time (said of God) IV to dictate (على ھ to
s.o. .s.th.) V to enjoy (ھ ب، من، s.th.) X to take from dictation (ھ s.th.) 923
مال malā pl. امالء amlā’ open country, open tract of land; steppe, desert
الملوان al-malawān day and night
ملوة malwa malouah, a dry measure (Eg. = 2 ٤.٥٢١ = قدح l)
ملي malīy (relatively long) period of time; مليا malīyan for quite a while, for a long time
امالء imlā’ dictation; O transmission (of a telephone message)
 □ مالية milāya pl. -āt (< مالءة mulā’a) wrap worn by Egyptian women; sheet, bed sheet
ملية malīya pl. ماليا malāyā (tun.) garment of sedouin women
مليار (Fr.) milyār pl. -āt (U.S.) billion, (G.s.) milliard
 مليجرام milligrām pl. -āt milligram
مليم (Fr. millième) mallīm, malīm pl. -āt, مالليم malālīm  the smallest monetary unit in Egypt (= 1/1000 pound); see also under لوم
مليمتر millīmitr pl. -āt millimeter
│ million malāyīn  ماليين -āt, pl. malyūn مليون millionaires اصحاب الماليين
مم mm. abbreviation of millimeter
مما mimmā, shortened form مم mimma = min mā
ممن mimman = min man
 من man 1. (interr. pron.) who? which one? which ones? 2. (relative pron.) who; the one who; those who; one who; whoever, whosoever, everyone who, he who
 من min (prep.) 1. of; some, some of, (a) part of; belonging to, pertaining to, from among │ من كان to belong or pertain to, be among …, fall under ...; ان ذلك من (anna) among other things ...; من منھم (man) some of them; من ومنھم – من منھم some of them -- others ..., there are (were) those who -- and others who ...; قريش من رجل (rajul) a man of the Koreish tribe; األيام من يوم (yaum, ayyām) some day, some day or other; األمور من امر (amr) s.th. or other, some affair, some business; الطعام من اكل (ṭa‘ām) he ate (a little, some) of the food; الكتب من رايته ما mā ra’aituhū min saling- kutub (what I have seen of the books =) the books I have seen; كتب من رايته ما (what I have seen of books =) what(ever) books I have seen; شريك من <I ما God has no partner whatsoever; يقدر احد من ما (aḥadin yaqdiru) nobody can ...; شخص من ما (šakṣin) there ia absolutely none who ...
consisting of, made of, of (material) │ حرير من ثوب (taub) a garment of silk, a silk dress
at, on (time) │ الليل من (lail) at night; من يومه (yaumihī) on the very same day; من ساعته at that moment, at once, right away
at, on, by (place) │ منكبه من ھزه (hazzahū, mankibihī) he shook him by the shoulder
like, as, such as, as for instance; namely, to wit │ والقدرة العلم من ازلية صفات واإلرادة (ṣifāt azalīya, ‘ilm, qudra, irāda)
eternal attributes such as knowledge, power, volition; ان من الجرائد قالته ما صح اذا (ṣaḥḥa) if what the newspapers say is true, namely that ...
in an exclamation: ليلة من طولھا يا yā ṭūlahā min lailatin oh, the length of the night! what a long night it is! حمل من اخفه ما mā akaffahū min ḥimlin how light a burden it is! مخبول من ويحه (waiḥahū) woe to this fool!
in relation to, with respect to, toward │ تركيا من المانيا مقاصد Germany’s intentions as far as Turkey is concerned
substituting for an accusative (originally, in a partitive sense): ذلك اذكى فضولھا من this kindled her curiosity 924
2. from, away from, out of, from the direction of │ ھنا من اخرج ukruj min hunā get out of here! بغداد من جاء he came from Baghdad; طرف من (ṭarafi) and قبل من (qibal) on the part of, on the side of, from, by; الى -- من from -- (up) to; واليه منه كان (wa-ilaihi) to depend entirely on s.o., he inseparable from s.o., appertain to s.o.; ما منھم كان what share they had in ..., to what extent they were involved in ..., what part they played in …
from, beginning , starting ..., since, for; after │ شھر من (šahr) for a month (past), since one month ago; مدة من (mudda) for some time (in the past); ھذه من ايام بعد الحوادث (ba‘da ayyāmin) a few days after these events
of, by, at, about (denoting the source of one’s fear, fright, alarm, apprehension, etc.). e.g., من خاف من، فزع etc.
against, from (with verb, denoting protection, defense, warning, freeing, exemption), e.g., من، حرره من، حماه من، منعه من اعفاه, etc.
through, by, via, (with verb, of motion to denote the way, route, or means) │ دخل الباب من he entered through the gate; من الراديو طريق by radio
than (with the comparative) │ من اقوى aqwā min an too strong as to ..., too strong for ...
due to, owing to, for, because of; at, about (with verbs denoting emotions; as,
 for instance, “be amazed”, “be delighted”, “he glad”, etc.), e.g., من دھش من، تعجب, etc.
by, through (with the passive to indicate the doer, agent, perpetrator)
من بعد، من حيث، as such compounds to as second the under see من دون، من غير، من قبل word
 من manna u (mann) to he kind, kindly, benign, gracious, benevolent, obliging ( على to or toward, s.o.); to show, grant, or do s.o. (على) a favor, bestow blessings, benefits, favors (على upon s.o.); to grant, award, present, give (على ب to s.o. s.th.), confer, bestow graciously (على ب upon s.o. s.th.), bless (على ب s.o. with), inspire (ب على s.o. with; of God) IV to tire, fatigue, weaken (ه s.o.), sap the strength (على of s.o.) V do. VIII to be kind, kindly, benign, gracious, benevolent, obliging (على to or toward s.o.), to show, grant, or do s.o. ( على) a favor, bestow blessings, benefits, favors (على upon s.o.); to bestow or confer most graciously (على ب upon s.o. s.th.), kindly grant, award, or give (على ب to s.o. s.th.)
من mann gracious bestowal; favor; benefit, blessing, boon; gift, present, largess; honeydew; manna; (pl. امنان amnān) a weight of 2 رطل raṭl │ تعالى بمنه by the grace of God
منة minna pl. منن minan grace; kindness, kindliness, good will, friendliness, amiability, graciousness, benevolence, benignity; favor, act of kindness, benefit, blessing, boon, gift, present
من munna pl. منن munan strength, vigor, stamina │ المنة شديد strong, vigorous, sturdy
منان mannān kind, kindly, benign, gracious; munificent, liberal, generous; benefactor; المنان (one of the attributes of God) the Benefactor
منون manūn fate, destiny; fate of death, death
امتنان grateful obligation, indebtedness, obligedness, gratitude
ممنون indebted, obligated, obliged, grateful, thankful (ل to s.o.); weak, languid
ممنونية mamnūnīya grateful obligation, indebtedness, obligedness, gratitude
ممتن mumtann indebted. much obliged (
ل to s.o.) 925
منتول mintūl menthol
منجنيق manjanīq f., pl. -āt, مجانق majāniq 
mangonel, ballista, catapult
منجو mangū mango
منح manaḥa a (manḥ) to grant, give, accord, award (ه ھ to s.o. s.th.), bestow, confer (ھ ه upon s.o. s.th.) III to bestow favor (ه upon s.o.)
منح manḥ granting, giving, donation, bestowal, conferment, award(ing)
منحة minḥa pl. منح minaḥ act of kindness; privilege; gift, present, donation, grant, favor, benefit, benefaction; compensation; remuneration, allowance, indemnity (jur.); scholarship, stipend │ اإلقامة منحة m. al-iqāma living allowance; جامعية منحة (jāmi‘īya) academic scholarship; السكنى منحة m. as-suknā housing allowance, rent allowance
مانح māniḥ donor, giver, granter
ندل see mandal مندل 
 منديل mandīl, mindīl pl. مناديل manādīl 
kerchief; handkerchief; head kerchief
منذ mundu and مذ mud 1. (prep.) since, for; ago
│ شھر منذ (šahr) for a month (past), since one month ago; a month ago; ايام منذ (ayyām) for the past few days; a few days ago; قريب عقد منذ (‘aqd) of late, lately, recently; اآلن منذ (āna) from now on, henceforth; اليوم منذ (yaum) as of today, from this day on
2. (conj.) since, ever since, from the time when │ صغيرا طفال كنت منذ (ṭiflan) since I was a small child
المنش بحر baḥr al-manš the Sea of Le Manche, i.e., the English Channel
منشوبية manšūbīya (from Copt. manšōpi) cell, living quarters (Copt.-Chr.)
منشوري manšūrī Manchurian
منصون manṣūn monsoon
منطر manṭara to threw down, toss down
 منطق manṭaqa to gird (ھ ب s.th. with) II to gird o.s., swathe o.s. (ب with), wind around one’s body (ب s.th.)
منطوفلة manṭūfla (syr.) slipper
منع mana‘a a (man‘) to stop, detain, keep from entering or passing (ه s.o.); to hinder, prevent (ھ s.th.; من or ه عن s.o. from), keep, restrain, hold back (ه s.o. من or عن from); to bar, block, obstruct (ه ھ s.o.’s way or access to); to withdraw, take away (من or عن or ه ھ from s.o. s.th.), deprive ( من or عن or ه ھ s.o. of); to forbid, interdict (من or عن or ه ھ to s.o. s.th.), prohibit (من or عن or ه ھ s.o. from); to decline to accept, declare impossible or out of the question (ان that); to refuse, deny (ھ عن or ھ ه s.th. to s.o.), withhold (ھ عن or ھ ه s.th. from s.o.); to stop, cease (ھ doing s.th., عن with regard to s.o.), abstain, refrain (ھ from doing s.th., عن with regard to s.o.); to ward off, avert, keep, keep away (ھ عن s.th. from s.o.); to protect, guard (ه من s.o. from), defend (ه s.o., ھ s.th., عن against); -- manu‘a u (مناع manā‘, مناعة manā‘a) to be strongly fortified, inaccessible, impregnable; to be unconquerable, invincible, insurmountable II to fortify, strengthen, make inaccessible (ھ s.th.) III to put up resistance, act in opposition (ه to s.o.), oppose, counteract (ه s.o.), work against s.o. (ه); to stand up, rise (ه against s.o.); to resist, oppose (في s.th.), offer resistance, object, raise objections ( في to s.th.), revolt, rebel (في against s.th.); to refuse, deny (ه ھ s.o. s.th.) V to refuse, decline (عن to do s.th.); to desist, refrain, abstain, keep (عن from s.th., from doing s.th.), forbear, leave off (عن s.th.), stop, cease (عن doing s.th.), avoid (عن s.th. or doing s.th.); to 926 be or become inaccessible, unassailable, impregnable; to strengthen, grow in strength; to seek protection (ب with or in) VIII to refrain, abstain, keep (عن from doing s.th.), forbear (عن s.th.), stop, cease (عن doing s.th.); to be prevented (عن from); to be impossible (على for s.o.); to refuse (عن to do s.th.), decline, turn down (عن s.th.); to refuse to have anything to do (على with), keep aloof (على from)
منع man‘ hindering, impeding, obstruction; prevention, obviation,
preclusion; prohibition, interdiction, ban, injunction; closure, stop, discontinuation, embargo; withdrawal, deprival, dispossession; withholding, detention
منعة manra resistance, power, force, vigor, strength, stamina, insuperability, invincibility
منيع manī‘ pl. منعاء muna‘ā’ unapproachable, inaccessible, impervious, impenetrable, forbidding; well-fortified; mighty, strong, powerful; impregnable, unconquerable; insurmountable, insuperable, invincible, immune │ منيع الجانب strong, unassailable; منيع حاجز insurmountable barrier
مناعة manā‘a inaccessibility; strength, impregnability; hardiness, sturdiness, power of resistance; immunity (to a disease, also dipl.); imperviousness, impermeability, impenetrability, forbiddingness
امنع amna‘  harder to get at, more forbidding; offering greater resistance
ممانعة mumāna‘a opposition; resistance, revolt, rebellion; O inductive resistance (el.)
تمنع tamannu‘ rejection, refusal
امتناع imtinā‘ refraining, abstention (عن from); refusal, denial; impossibility
مانع māni‘ hindering, forbidding, etc., see 1; preventive; prohibitive; - (pl. موانع mawāni‘ ) hindrance, obstacle, obstruction; impediment; a preventive, preservative, prophylactic; objection; (pl.
-āt) O cutout, anti-interference device (radio) │ مانعا رأى ما (ra’ā) to have no objections; مانع ال māni‘a there is nothing in the way, nothing prevents me (you, etc.) from (عن)
ممنوع mamnā‘ forbidden, prohibited, banned, interdicted; indeclinable (gram.)
no ممنوع الدخول smoking! no ممنوع التدخين │ limits! off out! keep admittance!
ممنوعية mamnū‘īya forbiddenness
ممتنع mumtani‘ refraining, abstaining, forbearing; rejecting, refusing; prevented; forbidden, interdicted, prohibited, banned; inaccessible (على to s.o.); forbidding,
 inscrutable, impenetrable, elusive; difficult to imitate; impossible
منغنيس manganīs manganese
منغوليا mungūliyā Mongolia
منفيال (It. manovella) manafella crank
منولوج see manalōg منلوج
(منو and منا (منى manā u (manw) and منى manā i (many) to put to the test, try, tempt, afflict (ه ب s.o. with; of God); pass. مني muniya to be afflicted (ب with), be sorely tried (ب by), suffer, sustain, undergo, experience (ب s.th.), be affected, hit, smitten, stricken (ب by); to find by good luck, be so fortunate as to find (ل s.th.) II to awaken the desire (ب or ه ھ in s.o. for), make s.o. (ه) wish (ب or ھ for); to make (ه s.o.) hope (ب or ھ for), give (ه s.o.) reason to hope (ب or ھ for), raise hopes (ب or ھھ of) in s.o. (ه); to promise (ه ب ان، s.o. that)
│ ب نفسه منى (nafsahū) to indulge in the hope of ..., have every hope that ... IV to shed (ھ blood); to emit, 927 ejaculate (ھ sperm) V to desire (ھ s.th.), wish (ھ for s.th.; ل ھ s.o. s.th.) X to practice onanism, masturbate
منى manan and منية manīya pl. منايا manāyā fate, destiny, lot; fate of death; death
منى minan semen, sperm
منوي minawī seminal, spermatic
منى minan m. and minā f. the valley of Mina near Mecca
منية munya, minya pl. منى munan wish, desire; object of desire
امنية umnīya pl. امان amānin, اماني amānīy wish, demand, claim, desire, longing, aspiration
تمنية tamniya and امناء imnā’ emission, ejaculation of the sperm
تمن tamannin pl. -āt wish; desire; request
استمناء istimnā’ self-pollution, masturbation, onanism
منولوج manolōj, monolōg pl. -āt monologue; (cabaret) act │ فكاھية منولوجات (fukāhīya) skits, comic sketches, music-hall songs
منومتر manūmitr pl. -āt manometer, pressure gauge
المنيا al-minyā El Minya (city in central Egypt)
مھجة muhja pl. مھج muhaj, مھجات muhajāt lifeblood, heartblood; heart; innermost self, intrinsic nature, core; soul; life │ مھجتھا في اآلمال طعنت (ṭu‘inat) hopes received the deathblow
مھد II to spread out evenly (ھ s.th.); to smooth, smoothen (ھ s.th.); to pave (ھ a road); to flatten, plane, make even or level (ھ s.th.): to arrange, settle, straighten, put in order ( ھ s.th.); to free from obstacles, clear, pave (ھ s.th.; esp., the way, ل for or to); to make easy, facilitate, ease, make easily accessible (ل ھ to s.o. s.th.): to get ready, prepare (ھ s.th.), make (ھ a bed, etc.); to pass (الكرة al-kurata the ball, ل to s.o.); (verb alone, without qualifying direct object) to pave, open, clear, or prepare the way (ل ب for s.th. by or with), open, prepare, begin, start, initiate, bring about, set in motion (ل ب s.th. by or with) V to be paved, be clear or cleared, be or become open (way); to be or get settled or arranged; to go smoothly, go well, come off well; to be in order, be put in order, get straightened out
مھد mahd pl. مھود muhūd bed; cradle │ اللحد على المھد من (laḥd) from cradle to grave; مھده في قتله to nip s.th. in the bud; كان مھد في to be still in its beginnings or infancy, not have progressed beyond the early stages
مھاد mihād place of rest, resting place; bed; bosom, pale, fold (fig., in which s.th. rests)
تمھيد tamhīd smoothing, leveling, paving; facilitation, easing; preparation; foreword, preface, proem; introduction; preliminaries │ ل تمھيد in order to facilitate
...; in preparation of ..., as a preliminary step toward ..., for the purpose of ...
تمھيدي tamhīdī introductory, prefatory, preliminary, preparatory │ تمھيدية اجراءات (ijrā’āt) preliminaries; preliminary proceedings (jur.); تمھيدي حكم (ḥukm) interlocutory decree, interlocutory judgment (jur.); تمھيدي قرار (qarār) provisional in, junction, temporary
 restra.ining order (jur.); تمھيدي شرح (šarh) prefatory remarks
ممھد mumahhad leveled, smoothed, smooth, even, level; well-ordered, wellarranged, well-prepared; prepared, cleared, open (way); paved (road)
مماھد mumāhad paved, improved (road) 928
 مھر mahara u a (mahr, مھار mahār, مھارة mahāra, مھور muhūr) to be skillful, adroit, dexterous, skilled, adept, proficient, expert, experienced, seasoned; -- u a (mahr) to give a dower (ھا to the bride) III to vie in skill (ه with s.o.) IV to give a dower (ھا to the bride)
مھر mahr pl. مھور muhūr dower, bridal money; price, stake; ransom
mihāra مھارة amhār, امھار pl. muhr, مھر
foal, colt
مھرات muhar, مھر pl. muhra مھرة
muharāt filly
مھارة mahāra skillfulness, adroitness, dexterity, skill, expertness, proficiency, adeptness
ماھر māhir pl. مھرة mahara skillful, adroit, dexterous, skilled, proficient, adept, expert, practiced, experienced, seasoned
 مھر muhr seal, signet; stamp
مھردار muhrədār keeper of the seal
مھرجان mahrajān, mihrajān pl. -āt festival, festivity, celebration │ بريطانيا مھرجان Festival of Britain
مھك mahaka a (mahk) to grind, crush, bruise, pound
مھكة makha, muhka freshness of youth, bloom of youth
مھل mahala a (mahl, مھلة muhla) to tarry, dawdle, be slow, take one’s time (في in s.th.) II and IV to give (ه s.o.) time, grant ( ه s.o.) a respite or delay V to be slow, proceed slowly and deliberately (في in s.th.) │ خطاه في تمھل (kuṭāhu) to slacken one’s pace; يقول تمھل he said slowly ... VI = V; X to ask (ه s.o.) for a respite; to ask (ه s.o.) to wait
مھل mahl, mahal slowness, leisureliness, ease; leisure; مھال mahlan slowly, leisurely, in no hurry │ مھل على slowly, leisurely, in no hurry; مھلك mahlaka easy does it! take it easy! على مھلك take it easy! take your time!
مھلة muhla respite, delay; time limit for a decision, time to think s.th. over
مھيلة muhaila large boat (ir.)
امھال imhāl grant of respite, concession of a delay
امھالي imhālī tending to delay, dilatory
تمھل tamahhul slowness deliberateness
│ بتمھل slowly; gradually
متمھل mutamahhil slow, deliberate, leisurely, unburned, easy
متماھل mutamāhil leisurely, comfortable, easy, unhurried, slow
مھما mahmā (conj.) whatever, whatsoever; no matter how much, however much, much as ...; whenever │ األمر من يكن مھما (yakun, amr) whatever the case may be, be it as it may
مھن mahana u a (mahn, مھنة mahna) to serve (ه s.o.); to humble, degrade, treat in a humiliating manner (ه s.o.); to hackney, wear out in common service, wear out by use (ھ s.th.); -- mahuna u (مھانة mahāna) to be despicable, base, low, mean, menial III to practice (ھ a profession) VIII to humble, degrade, treat in a humiliating manner (ه s.o.); to revile (ه s.o.); to despise (ه s.o.); to employ for menial services (ه s.o.); to hackney, wear out in common service, wear out by use (ھ s.th.); to practice professionally, as a trade (ھ s.th.)
مھنة mihna pl. مھن mihan work, job, occupation, calling, vocation, profession, trade, business
مھني mihnī professional, vocational; gainfully employed │ المھني اإلرشاد (iršād) vocational guidance 929
مھين mahīn pl. مھناء muhanā’  despised, despicable, contemptible, vile
امتھان imtihān degradation, humiliation, contempt, disdain; abuse, misuse, improper treatment
 ماھن māhin pl. مھان muhhān menial servant
mahayāt مھيات mahawāt, مھوات pl. mahāh مھاة
wild cow
 موء) ماء) mā’a u (مواء muwā’) to mew, miaow
مواء muwā’ mewing, miaow (of a cat)
موء see مائي and ماء  
موبيليات mōbīlīyāt (pl.) furniture
موت) مات) māta u (maut) to die; to perish; to lose life, become dead; to abate, subside, die down, let up (wind, heat) II and IV to make (ه s.o.) die, let (ه s.o.) perish; to kill, put to death (ه s.o.); to be the death of s.o. (ه), cause the death of s.o. (ه) IV to mortify (نفسه o.s., one’s flesh); to suppress, deaden (ھ s.th.) VI to feign death, pretend to be dead; to feign weakness; to be sluggish, listless, slack (في in s.th.) X to seek death; to defy death, sacrifice o.s., risk one’s life; to strive desperately (في for), make desperate efforts <..i in order to); to tight desperately
موت maut and موتة mauta death; decease, demise │ ابيض موت (abyaḍ) natural death
موات mawāt that which is lifeless an inanimate thing; barren, uncultivated land, wasteland
موتان mautāni, mūtān dying, death; epidemic, plague
موتى amwāt, اموات pl. mait mayit, ميت
mautā lifeless inanimate, dead, deceased
ميتة maita corpse, carcass, carrion; meat of an animal not slaughtered in accordance with ritual requirements (Isl.
Law)
ميتة األبطال │ death of manner mīta ميتة
death of a hero, death in battle
ممات mamāt place where s.o. died; decease, death
اماتة imāta killing; mortification (of the flesh)
استماتة istimāta death defiance; desperate effort, desperate struggle (في for)
مائت mā’it dying, moribund, mortal
مميت mumīt lethal, fatal, mortal, deadly
sin mortal (kāṭi’a) خاطئة مميتة │
ممات mumāt antiquated, obsolete
مستميت mustamīt death-defying, reckless, heroin; martyr; suffering a martyr’s death
موتوسيكل (Fr. motocycle) mōtōsīkil pl. -āt motorcycle
موج) ماج) māja u (mauj, موج mawajān) to heave, swell, roll, surge (sea); to be excited, agitated (ب by) II to ripple (ھ the surface of water, etc.); to wave (ھ the hair) V = I; to rise in waves; to ripple, be rippled (as, the surface of water); to undulate, move in undulations; to sway, roll VI to be waved, be undulate; to form an undulating line (حول around); to flow, flood, swell, surge
موج mauj pl. امواج amwāj billows, surges, seas, breakers; waves; ripples; -- (n. un. موجة mauja pl. -āt) billow, surge, sea, breaker; wave; ripple; oscillation, vibration, undulation │ طويل موج long wave (radio); قصير موج short wave (radio); متوسط موج (mutawassiṭ) medium wave (radio); صوتية امواج (ṣauṭīya) sound waves; مستمرة امواج (mustamirra) continuous waves; مضمحلة امواج (muḍmaḥilla) 930 damped waves; منعكسة امواج (mun‘akisa) reflected waves, indirect waves; امواج (muwajjaha) directional beams (radio); O حارة موجة (ḥārra) heat wave, hot spell; الشباب موجة m. aš-šabāb bloom of youth, freshness of youth; الموجة سعة sa‘at al-m. amplitude; الموجة طول ṭūl al-m. wave length (radio); استنكار موجة a wave of disapproval
مواج mawwāj undulating, undulant; surging, rolling; waved, undulated, undulate; O (pl. -āt) transmitter (radio)
تمويج tamwīj waving (of the hair) │ البارد على التمويج cold wave, permanent wave
تموج tamawwuj pl. -āt oscillation, vibration; undulation, undulant motion; swaying, rolling │ صوتية تموجات (ṣautīya) sound waves; O الھواء تموج t. al-hawā’ atmospheric vibrations
 مائج mā’ij surging, swelling, rolling, tumultuous, stormy, high (sea)
مموج mumawwaj undulated, undulate, waved, wavy, wavelike, undulatory
متموج mutamawwij surging, rolling, undulating, undulant, wavelike, undulatory; wavy (hair) │ المتموجة الحمى (ḥummā) undulant fever, Malta fever, brucellosis (med.)
متماوج mutamāwij undulate, waved, wavy, rippled; curled
مودة mōda pl. -āt fashion, style; fashionable; pl. hat fashions, millinery │ المودة على of the latest fashion, fashionable, modish, stylish
مودل mōdel or موديل mōdēl pl. -āt model, pattern
 مور) مار) māra u (maur) to move to and fro, move from side to side V do.
موار mawwār O pendulum
تمور tamawwur swaying, swinging motion; تمورا to and fro, back and forth
 مار look up alphabetically and under مر marra
 المورة al-mōra Morea, Poloponnesus
□ موراتزم mūrātizm (eg.) rheumatism
موراني mūrānī (syr.) = ماروني look up alphabetically
مورفين murfīn morphine
مورينة mūrīna pl. -āt wooden beam, rafter
موز mauz (call.; n. un. ة) banana
 ماس mās diamond (cf. الماس alphabetically)
ماسي māsī diamond (used attributively)
amwās امواس mawāsin, مواس pl. f., mūsā موسى 
straight razor
 موسى mūsā Moses │ موسى سمك samak m. plaice, flounder (zool.)
موسوي mūsawī Mosaic(al) موسطردة (It. mostarda) musṭarda mustard موسكو moskū, moskō Moscow
موسيقار mūsīqār musician
موسيقى mīsīqa (f.) music
موسيقي mūsīqī musician; musical │ آلة موسيقية musical instrument
ماش māš (n. un. ة) leguminous plant with black edible grains, Indian pea (Phaseolus max. L.; bot.)
الموصل al-maṣil Mosul (city in N Iraq)
موده =) موضه) mōḍa fashion, style
مأق see موق
 مول II to make rich, enrich (ه s.o.); to finance ( ھ s.th.) V to be financed; to become rich, wealthy X to become rich, wealthy
مال mal pl. اموال amwāl property, possessions, chattels, goods; wealth, affluence; fortune, estate; money; 931 income, revenue; assets, capital, stock, fund; (eg.) tax, esp., land tax; (Isl. Law) marketable title; pl. property, assets, chattels, goods; pecuniary resources, funds; taxes │ مال ذو wealthy, rich; مال احتياطي (iḥtyāṭī) reserve fund; االطيان مال (eg.) land tax; الحرام مال m. al-ḥarām ill- gotten gain; الحكومة مال (eg.) taxes; اموال مقررة (muqarrara) direct taxes; نقلي مال (naqlī) or منقول مال movable property, movables (Isl. Law); ثابت مال landed property, real property, immovables; مال متقوم غير (mutaqawwim) thing without commercial value (Isl. Law); المال امين treasurer; المال بيت bait al-m. (public) treasury; مال رأس etc., see رأس
مالي mālī monetary, pecuniary, financial; finance (in compounds); fiscal; financier, capitalist │ مالي بت (bait) finance house, banking house; مالي تضخم (taḍakkum) inflation; مالية سنة (sana) fiscal year; مالية غرامة (garāma) or مالية عقوبة a fine
مالية mālīya monetary affairs, finance, public revenue; finances, financial situation │ المالية وزارة finance ministry, treasury department
موال mawwāl pl. -ūn (ir.) financier, capitalist
تمويل tamwīl financing; (eg.) tax-paying ممول mumawwil pl. -ūn (eg.) taxpayer ممول mumawwal propertied, wealthy,
rich
 متمول mutamawwil rich, wealthy, well- to-do; financier, capitalist
 موال mawwāl pl. مواويل mawāwīl  a poem in colloquial language, often sung to the accompaniment of a reed pipe
مواليا mawāliyā do.
موم mūm wax
مومياء mūmiyā’, مومية mūmiya pl. -āt mummy
مون) مان) māna u (maun, مؤنة mu’na) and II to provision. supply with provisions (ه s.o.); to provide, furnish, supply (ھ ب or ه s.o. or s.th. with) V to store up provisions, lay in provisions, provision o.s.
مونة mūna provisions; (eg.) mortar
تموين tamwīn food supply, provisioning; supply; replenishment
ميناء pl. موانيء
مونيخ mūnīk Munich
موه) ماه) māha u (mauh) to mix (ھ ب s.th. with); -- u a (mauh, مؤوه mu’ūh, ماھة māha) to abound in water II to abound in water; to pour water (ھ into), admix water (ھ to); to thin, dilute, water down, adulterate (ھ s.th.); to falsify (على ھ، s.th.), misrepresent (ھ s.th.); to feign, affect (ب على s.th. toward s.o.); to camouflage (ھ s.th.; Syr., mil.); to coat, overlay, plate (ھ ب a base metal with gold or silver) IV to add water (ھ to)
ماء mā’ pl. مياه miyāh, امواه amwāh water; liquid, fluid; juice │ الجاري كالماء fluently, smoothly, like clockwork; ماء ابيض (abyaḍ) cataract (eye disease); ماء الزھر m. az-zahr orange-blossom water;ماء الشباب m. aš-šabāb freshness of youth, prime of youth; عذب ماء (‘adb) fresh water, potable water; غازي ماء pl. غازية مياه carbonated water, mineral water; ماء الكولونيا Eau de Cologne; الوجه ماء m. al- wajh honor, decency, modesty, self- respect; وجھه ماء اراق arāqa mā’a wajhihī to sacrifice one’s honor, abase o.s.; to dishonor, disgrace s.o.; وجھه ماء بذل do.; ماء الورد m. al-ward rose water; اقليمية مياه (iqlīmīya) territorial waters; األمطار مياه m. al-amṭār rain water; جوفية مياه (jaufīya) ground water; ساحلية مياه (sāḥilīya) coastal waters; السماء ماء بنو banū m. as-samā’ the Arabs 932
ماھي māhī and ماوي māwī watery, aqueous, aquatic
مائي mā’ī aquatic, water; liquid, fluid; hydraulic
ماھية look up alphabetically
ماوية māwīya and مائية mā’īya juice, sap
تمويه tamwīh coating, plating; clothing, attire, garb; overfilling; feigning, pretending, affectation; camouflage (syr., mil.); distortion (of facts), misrepresentation, falsification │ كأس التمويه ka’s at-t. overfull cup
تمويھي tamwīhī feigned, sham, mock, make-believe │ تمويھية غارة mock attack, feint
موه see ماوية
موت see ميتة and ميت
ميح) ماح) māḥa i (maiḥ, ميحوحة maiḥūḥa) to strut, walk with affected dignity; to waddle V and VI to reel, totter, stagger; to swing X to ask (ه ھ s.o. a favor), request ( ھ s.th.) │ من عذرا استماح (‘udran) to apologize for s.th.
ميد) ماد) māda i (maid, ميدان mayadān) to be moved, shaken, upset, shocked; to sway; to swing; to feel giddy, be dizzy; ب ماد to shake s.th. violently VI to sway back and forth, swing from side to side
ميدة mīda pl. ميد miyad (eg.) lintel, breastsummer (arch.)
ميداء mīdā’ measure, amount, length, distance; mīdā’a (prep.) in front of, opposite, facing
ميدان maidān, mīdān pl. ميادين mayādīn  square, open place, open tract; field; arena; battleground, battlefield; combat area, fighting zone; race course, race track; playground (fig.); field, domain, line, sphere of activity │ التدريب ميدان drill ground; military training center; ميدان الحرب m. al-ḥarb theater of war; السباق ميدان race course, race track; العمل ميدان m.
al-‘amal field of activity, scope of action; القتال ميدان battlefield; العمل ميدان من خرج to be put out of servi-šce or commission; ظھر الميدان في to turn up, appear on the scene; في الشرف ميدان m. iš-šaraf on the field of
 honor; الميدان مدافع fieldpieces, field guns, infantry howitzers
مائد mā’id pl. ميدى maidā dizzy, seasick
مائدة mā’ida pl. -āt, موائد mawā’id  table
m. مائدة الزينة table; operating مائدة التشريح │ as- m. مائدة السفرة table; dressing az-zīna table dining sufra
مداليون madāliyōn medallion
 مير) مار) māra i (mair) and IV to provide (عياله
‘iyālahū for one’s family)
ميرة mīra pl. مير miyar provisions, supplies, stores
ميار mayyār caterer, purveyor, supplier
 ميري mīrī (= اميري) public, governmental, government-, satate- (in compounds); fiscal; الميري the government, the fiso, the exchequer │ الميري مال government taxes; الميري امالك government land
ميرآالى mīrālāy (formerly, Eg.) colonel
ميرلواء mīrliwā’ (Ir.) brigadier general
 مير (Fr. maire) mēr pl. اميار amyār (magr.) mayor
ميرون mairūn chrism (Chr.)
ميز) ماز) māza i (maiz) to separate, keep apart ( بين two things); to distinguish, honor, favor (ه s.o.) II to confer distinction (ه upon s.o.), distinguish, commend, honor, favor (ه s.o., عن above s.o. else, also على); to distinguish, set aside, cause to stand out (ه ھ، s.o., s.th., عن from); to 933 prefer (عن ھ or ه s.o. or s.th. to); to separate, segregate, set apart, single out, select, choose, pick (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to grant a special right or privilege (ه to s.o.), privilege (ه s.o.); to distinguish, differentiate, discriminate (ه ھ، عن s.o., s.th. from, also بين من؛ between two things, one thing from another) IV to distinguish, mark (ھ s.th.); to prefer (ھ s.th.) V to be set apart, be separated
or separate, be distinct, be distinguished, be differentiated; to distinguish o.s., be distinguished, be marked, stand out; to be marked out with distinction, be honored, be favored; to be preferred │ غيظا تميز (gaiẓan) to burst with anger VI to distinguish o.s. (في in); to differ VIII to distinguish o.s. (ب by, في in
s.th., عن or على above s.o. or s.th., من as compared with s.o. or s.th.); to be distinguished, be marked (ب by); to be characterized, be signalized (ب by); to excel, surpass, outdo, outshine (عن or على
s.o. or s.th.); to have the advantage, take preference (على over), be preferred (على to); to differ (من or على from s.o., في or ب in, in that ...)
ميز maiz distinction; favoring, preferment
ميزة mīza peculiarity, distinguishing feature, distinctive mark, essential property, characteristic; prerogative, priority right
اميز amyaz   preferable (على to)
تمييز tamyīz distinction; preference; preferment, favoring, favoritism, preferential treatment; privileging; partiality; separation, segregation, sifting, singling out; specification (gram.); differentiation; discrimination, judgment, discretion, common sense; realization, discernment, conscious perception; deliberate intention │ التمييز سن sinn at-t. age of discretion (jur.); التمييز محكمة maḥkamat at-t. court of cassation (Syr.); تمييز غير من unwittingly, unintentionally, with no definite purpose in mind; عن اخرجه التمييز دائرة (akrajahū) to deprive s.o. of his clear judgment, rob s.o. of his senses
امتياز imtiyāz pl. -āt distinction, (mark of) honor; advantage, benefit, merit; difference, distinction, differentiation, discrimination; special right, privilege; concession, patent, permit, license, franchise; (oil) concession; prerogative, priority right │ األجنبية االمتيازات (ajnabiya) the capitulations (of Western powers in the Orient) ; الدبلوماسية االمتيازات diplomatic privileges; االمتياز صاحب holder of the concession, concessionaire, responsible publisher of a newspaper
مميز mumayyiz distinguishing, distinctive; characteristic, peculiar, proper; discriminating, discerning, reasonable, rational (Isl. Law)
مميزة mumayyiza pl. -āt distinguishing feature, distinctive mark, characteristic
 trait, peculiarity; distinction, (mark of) honor; advantage, merit
مميز mumayyaz distinguished, preferred, favored, privileged; distinct, separate, special
متميز mutamayyiz distinguished, distingue; marked, notable, prominent, outstanding, characterized by distinctive traits, characteristic
ممتاز mumtāz distinguished, differentiated; exquisite, select, choice, rare; outstanding, superior, first-rate, first- class, top-notch, exceptional, excellent; privileged; special, extra; (as an examination grade) passed with distinction, excellent │ ممتازة درجة (daraja) special class; ممتازة ديون (duyūn) privileged debts, preferred debts; ممتاز عدد (‘adad) special issue (of a periodical) 934
ميزانين (It. mezzanino) mēzānīn mezzanine
ميس) ماس) māsa i (mais, ميسان mayasān) to move to and fro, swing from side to side; to walk with a proud, swinging gait V to walk with a proud, swinging gait
ميس mais proud gait; proud bearing ميس mīs pl. امياس amyās (eg.) target مياس mayyās walking with a lofty,
proud gait, strutting
aḍ-ḍubbāṭ m. ميس الضباط mess), (Engl. ميس 
officers mess
ميط) ماط) māṭa i (maiṭ, ميطان mayaṭān) to remove, pull away, draw back (ھ s.th.) IV do. │ عن اللثام اماط to disolose, uncover, reveal s.th., bring s.th. to light
ميع) ماع) mā‘a i (mai‘ to flow; to spread; to melt, dissolve (fat) II to soften, attenuate, dilute, liquefy (ھ s.th.) IV to melt, liquefy (ھ s.th.) V and VII to be melted, melt, dissolve
ميع mai‘ flowing, flow; liquidity, fluidity
ميعة mai‘a storax, a kind of incense obtained from the storax tree, resin of the storax tree (Styrax offioinalis); prime, bloom (of youth); indulgence, compliance; unstableness, unsteadiness
ميوعة muyū‘a liquid state; unstableness, unsteadiness
اماعة imā‘a melting, liquefaction
تميع tamayyu‘ liquescence, liquefaction
مائع mā’i‘ melting, liquid, fluid; liquescent, semiliquid; vague (expression); undecided, pending. in flux (situation)
ميكا (Engl.) mica
ميكاني mikānī mechanical, mechanize
ميكانيكا mīkānīkāhlnlhl meohanios
ميكانيكي mīkānīkī mechanical, automatic, mechanized, mechanic; motorized; a mechanic
ميكروب mikrūb pl. -āt microbe
ميكروفون mikrōfōn pl. -āt microphone
 ميل) مال) mīla i (mail, ميالن mayalān) to bend, bend down (الى to; على over); to bow down, lean over, turn (على to s.o.); to incline, slope, slant, tilt, tip, be inclined, slanting, oblique; to incline, tend. be favorably disposed (الى to), have a predilection, a liking, an inclination, a propensity (الى for), feel sympathy (الى for). sympathize (الى with), favor (الى s.o.); to take side, to side (مع with), be partial, biased, prejudiced; to lean (على against); to revolt, rebel (على against), be hostile (على to s.o.); to be disinclined, be averse (عن to s.th.); to have an antipathy, a distaste, a dislike (عن for); to deviate, digress, turn away, depart (عن from); الى به مال to drag or take s.o. or s.th. along to ...; -- (ميول muyūl) to prepare to set (sun); to decline, draw to its end (day, night); -- ميل mayila a (mayal) to be bent, bowed, tilted, averted, turned aside II and IV to incline, tip, tilt, bend, bow (ھ s.th.); to make (ه s.o.) inclined, sympathetic or favorably disposed (نحو or الى to s.o., to s.th.), incline, dispose (ه s.o.’s mind نحو or الى to), fill (ه s.o.) with sympathy (الى for); to make (ه s.o.) disinclined or averse (عن to), turn s.o.’s mind (ه) away from (عن), alienate (ه عن s.o. from) V and VI to reel, totter, stagger; to waver (tone); to sway, swing X to cause to incline, incline, tip, tilt (ھ s.th., الى to or toward); to win (ه s.o., also القلوب the hearts), attract, win over,
 bring to one’s side (ه s.o.), gain favor (ه with s.o.), win s.o.’s (ه) affection
ميل mail pl. ميول muyūl, اميال amyāl inclination, tilt; bend, turn, deflection; obliqueness, obliquity, slant; slope, incline, declivity; deviation, divergence, declination (astron.); affection (الى for), 935 attachment (الى to); predilection, liking, sympathy (الى for); propensity, disposition, bent, leaning, inclination, taste, desire, wish, longing; tendency, trend, drift (الى to, toward)
ميال mayyāl inclined, favorably disposed (الى to), leaning (الى toward); in favor (الى of), biased (الى toward or for)
اميل amyal  more inclined, strongly inclined (الى to), more in favor (الى of)
امالة imāla pronunciation of a shaded toward e (gram.)
تمايل tamāyul reel(ing), swaying, tottering, stagger(ing), waver(ing); vibration
مائل mā’il inclining (الى to or toward); bending down, bowing down, leaning over; bent, tilted; sloping, declivitous (terrain); inclined, slanting, oblique │ سطح مائل (saṭḥ) inclined plane (math.)
 ميل mīl pl. اميال amyāl mile (= 4000 ذراع); milestone │ بحري ميل (baḥrī) nautical mile, knot
 ميلي milli-, 1/1000 (in measures)
مين) مان) māna i (main) to lie, tell a lie
مين main pl. ميون muyūn lie, falsehood, untruth
ميان mayyān and مائن mā’in liar
 ميناء mīnā and ميناء mīnā’ glaze, glazing; enamel (of the teeth; as a coating of metal, glass, or pottery); (pl. موانئ mawāni’) dial (of a watch or clock) │ بالمينا مطلى (maṭlīy) enamel-coated, enameled
  ميناءmīnā’ f. and مينة mīna pl. موان mawānin, مين miyan port, harbor, anchorage │ ميناء جوية (jawwīya) airport



ن

نابلس nābulus  Nablus (town in W Jordan)
نابلي nābulī or نابولي nābūlī Napoli, Naples (seaport in S Italy)
نارجيل nārajīl coconut(s) (coll.)
نارجيلة nārajīla (n. un.) coconut; Persian water pipe, narghile
ناردين nāradīn nard, spikenard
نارنج naranj bitter orange
نازي nāzī Nazi
نازية nāzīya Nazism
ناس nās men, people, folks (cf. انس)
ناسوت nāsūt human nature, humanity
 نأم na’ama i a to sound, resound, ring out; to groan, moan
نأمة na’ma noise, sound, tone
نوم see na’um نؤوم 
ناموس nāmūs pl. نواميس nawāmīs  law; rule; honor; see also نمس
 نأى na’ā a (na’y) to be far, far away, distant, remote (عن from), keep away, stay away, keep at a distance, remain aloof, go away, move away, depart, absent o.s. (عن from), leave (عن s.th., s.o.) III to keep far away, keep at a distance (ھ عن or ه s.o. or s.th. from), keep a wide distance (ه ھ، between
s.o. or s.th., عن and) IV to remove, move away, take away, place at a distance (ه عن
s.o. from) VI to move away, move apart, draw sway from one another; to be away from one another, be at a distance, be separated, be apart; to keep away, stand aloof, be away, be at a distance (عن from) VIII to 936 be away, be at a distance (عن from); to go away, move away, draw away, depart, absent o.s. (عن from), leave (عن s.th., s.o.)
نأي na’y remoteness
انآء anā’, آناء pl. nu’ā نؤى and na’y نأي
an’ā’ ditch
انأى an’ā farther away, remoter, more distant
كان بمنأى عن │ place distant man’an منأى
to keep away from, remain aloof from,
 keep out of, not get involved in, refuse to have anything to do with
تناء tanā’in great distance, remoteness
ناء nā’in far, far away, distant, remote; outlying, out-of-the-way, secluded
 ناي nāy pl. -āt nay, a flute without mouth- piece, made of bamboo, rarely of wood, in different sizes, which, when blown, is held in a slanting forward position (unlike a German flute)
انبوب unbūb and انبوبة unbūba pl. انابيب anābīb  علىint (of a knotted stem), part between two nodes; tube, pipe, conduit, conduit pipe, main duct; tube (e.g., of toothpaste); light bulb │ الرئة انبوب u. ar- ri’a windpipe, trachea (anat.); انبوب الطوربيد torpedo tube; مفرغ انبوب (mufarrag) vacuum tube (radio); األنابيب خط kaṭṭ al-a. pipeline
انبوبي unbūbī tubular, tube-shaped, fistulous; pipe- (in compounds)
نبأ naba’a a (نبء nab’, نبوء nubū’) to be high, raised, elevated, protruding, projecting, prominent; to overcome, overpower, overwhelm (على s.o.); to turn away, withdraw, shrink (عن from); to be repelled, repulsed, sickened, disgusted, shocked (عن by) II to inform, notify, tell, advise (عن or ه ب s.o. of s.th.), let (ه s.o.) know (عن or ب about), make known, announce, impart, communicate (عن or ه ب to s.o. s.th.); to be evidence (عن of), show, indicate, manifest, bespeak, reveal, disclose (عن s.th.) IV to inform, notify, tell, advise (ه ب s.o. of), let (ه s.o.) know ( ب about), make known, announce, impart, communicate (ه ب to s.o. s.th.) V to predict, foretell, forecast, prognosticate, presage, prophesy (ب s.th.); to claim to be a prophet, pose as a prophet X to ask for news, for information (ه s.o.); to inquire ( ھ after), ask (ھ about)
نبأ naba’ pl. انباء anbā’ news, tidings information, intelligence; announcement, report, news item, dispatch │ األنباء وكالة wakālat al-a. or األنباء مكتب maktab al-a. news agency, wire service
نبأة nab’a faint noise, low sound
نبوءة nubū’a pl. -āt prophecy
انباء inbā’ pl. -āt notification, information, communication
تنبؤ tanabbu’ pl. -āt prediction, forecast, prognostication, prophecy
نبت nabata u (nabt) to grow (esp., of plants, also, e.g., of teeth); to sprout, germinate; to produce plants, bring forth vegetation (soil) II to plant, sow, seed (ھ s.th.) IV to germinate, cause to sprout (ھ a seed); to make (ھ s.th.) grow; to grow, plant, cultivate (ھ s.th ) X to plant, cultivate, grow, raise (ھ plants); to breed (ھ plants), culture (ھ e.g., bacteria)
نبت nabt germination, sprouting; growth; vegetable growth, vegetation, plants; herbage, herbs, grass; sprout, plant
│ النبت قوة qūwat an-n. germinability, germinative faculty
نبتة nabta plant, sprout, shoot, seedling
نبات nabāt (coll.) plants, vegetation; -- (pl. -āt) plant, vegetable organism; herb │ اقتصادي نبات (iqtiṣādī) economic 937 plant; الزينة نبات n. az-zīna ornamental plant; نبات طبي (ṭibbī) medicinal plant; النبات آكل herbivorous animal; النبات سكر sukar an-n. rock candy; النبات علم ‘ilm an-n. botany
نباتي nabātī vegetable, vegetal, plant- (in compounds); botanical; botanist; vegetarian (adj. and n.)
نبوت nabbūt pl. نبابيت nabābīt  (eg.) quarterstaff, cudgel, bludgeon, club, truncheon, night stick
منبت manbat, manbit pl. منابت manābit  plantation, plant nursery, arboretum; hotbed, birthplace, fountainhead, headspring, origin, source
تنبيت tanbīt planting, cultivation, seed- bed planting
استنبات istinbāt planting, cultivation, growing
نابتة nābita generation
مستنبت mustanbat cultivated, grown, raised, bred; plantation, nursery, culture │ O البكتريا مستنبت bacterial culture
نبح nabaḥa a (nabḥ, نباح nubāḥ, nibāḥ, نبيح nabīḥ to bark (على at s.o.), bay (على s.o.) VI to bark at each other; to bark
 simultaneously, answer each other’s barks (dogs, e.g., at night)
نبيح and nibāḥ nubāḥ, نباح nabḥ, نبح
nabīḥ barking, bark, baying, yelp(ing)
نباح nabbāḥ barker, yelper
نبذ nabada i (nabd) to hurl, fling, throw, or toss, away (. s.th.); to reject, discard, spurn (ھ s.th.); to cut out, cast off, ostracize, expel, banish, disown, repudiate, remove, eliminate, dismiss, abandon, forsake, give up, renounce (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to withdraw, turn away (ھ from), relinquish, forswear (ھ s.th.); to break, violate, infringe (ھ a contract, a treaty), default (الى against s.o.) │ نبذ نبذه النواة (nabda n-nawāh) to reject or dismiss s.th. or s.o. with disdain, spurn or scorn s.th. or s.o. II = I; to press (ھ grapes) III to separate, secede, withdraw (ه from s.o.), oppose, resist (ه s.o.) │ الحرب نابذة (ḥarba) to declare war on s.o. IV to press (ھ grapes) VI to be feuding nil to withdraw, retire, retreat │ ناحية انتبذ (nāḥiyatan) to step aside, withdraw to one side; to retreat into a comer
نبذ nabd throwing away, discarding; rejection, repudiation, disavowal; renunciation, resignation; surrender, relinquishment, abandonment; (pl. انباذ anbād) small amount, a little, a trifle, bagatelle │ الطاعة نبذ insubordination
نبذة nubda pl. نبذ nubad small piece, part, portion, fragment, fraction, section; (newspaper) article, story; tract, pamphlet, leaflet; small ad(vertisement)
نبيذ nabīd cast-off, discarded, rejected, disowned, repudiated, dismissed; (pl. انبذة anbida) wine │ النبيذ روح rūḥ an-n. spirits of wine, alcohol
(qūwa) القوة النابذة O nābid: نابذ force centrifugal
منبوذ manbūd caot-off, discarded; cast- out, ostracized, banished, expelled, disowned, repudiated; abandoned; foundling, waif; neglected, disregarded; المنبوذون the untouchables (in India), the pariahs
نبر nabara i (nabr) to raise, elevate; to go up with the voice, sing in a high, pitched
voice; to stress, emphasize, accentuate; to shout, yell, scream (ه at s.o.); to cry out VIII to swell, become swollen
نبر nabr accentuation, accent, stress, emphasis
نبر nibr and انبار anbār pl. انابر anābir , انابير anābīr barn, shed, granary, storeroom, storehouse, warehouse 938
نبرة nabra pl. nabarāt swelling, intumescence, protuberance; stress, accent, accentuation; tone (of the voice); pl. نبرات inflection of the voice, intonation, cadence
منبر minbar pl. منابر manābīr  mimbar; pulpit; rostrum, platform, dais
منبار minbār pl. منابير manābīr gut, intestine │ محشي منبار (maḥšīy) sausage
light, lamp, nabārīs  نباريس pl. nibrās نبراس take to (ittakada) اتخذ منه نبراسا │ lantern
s.o. for an example, model o.s. after s.o.
نبز nabaza i (nabz) to give a derisive or insulting name (ه to s.o.) II do.
نبز nabaz pl. انباز anbāz nickname, sobriquet
نبس nabasa i (nabs, نبسة nubsa), to utter, say, speak II do. │ بكلمة نبس ما (bikalima) he did not say a word
نبش nabaša u (nabš) to excavate, dig up, dig out of the ground, unearth, exhume, disinter (ھ s.th.); to uncover, lay open, unveil, disclose, reveal, bring to light, bring out into the open (ھ s.th.) II to search, rummage, burrow (في in s.th.), ransack, rifle (في s.th.)
نبش nabš excavation, unearthing, digging up; examination, search, exploration; uncovering, disclosure, revelation │ القبور نبش desecration of graves, body snatching
نباش nabbāš gravedigger; body snatcher
نبيش nabīš dug up, excavated
انابيش pl. unbūša انبوشة and unbūš انبوش
anābīš excavation, excavated object
نبض nabaḍa i (nabḍ, نبضان nabaḍān) to beat, throb, pulsate, palpitate (heart, pulse); -- u (نبوض nubūḍ) to flow off, run off, drain (water)
 نبض nabḍ, nabaḍ pl. انباض anbāḍ throbbing, throb, pulsation, palpitation; pulse
نبضة nabḍa, nabaḍa pulsation, pulse beat
نابض nābiḍ pulsating, pulsative, beating, throbbing, palpitating; spring, main-spring, coil spring, spiral spring │ بالحياة نابض (bi-l-ḥayāh) vibrant with life
منبض manbiḍ spot where the pulse or heartbeat is felt
نبط nabaṭa u i (nabṭ, نبوط nubūṭ) to well out, gush out, spout, issue, stream forth (water) II (eg.) to find fault (على with s.o.), carp, scoff, gibe, sneer (على at s.o.) IV to cause ( ھ s.th.) to gush out or well forth, bring (ھ s.th.) to the surface; to find, discover (ھ water, oil, etc.), come upon (ھ), open up, tap (.a a source, a well, etc.) X to find, discover (الىI water, oil, etc.), come upon ( ھ), open up, tap (ھ a source, a well, etc.); to invent, discover, think up, devise, design, contrive, find out (ھ s.th.); to derive, extract, draw, take (ھ من s.th. from)
نبط nabaṭ depth, deep, profundity; the innermost, inmost part, core, heart
النبط an-nabaṭ pl. األنباط al-anbāṭ the Nabateans
نبطي nabaṭī Nabatean (adj. and n.) استنباط isṭinbāt discovery, invention مستنبط mustanbiṭ discoverer, inventor مستنبطات mustanbaṭāt discoveries,
inventions
نبع naba‘a u i a (nab‘, نبوع nubū‘, نبعان naba‘ān) to well, well up, gush forth, flow, issue (من from); to rise, spring, originate (river) IV to cause (ھ s.th.) to gush forth or flow out
نبع nab‘ a tree whose wood was used in arrow-making; spring, source │ 939 قرع بالنبع النبع (nab‘a) approx.: to cross swords with the opponent
منبع manba‘ pl. منابع manābi‘  spring, well; fountainhead, springhead, source, origin │ زيت منبع m. zait or بترول منبع oil well
ينبوع yanbū’ pl. ينابيع yanābī‘  spring, source, well
نبغ nabaga a u i (nabg, نبوغ nubūg) to arise, emerge (من from), come to the fore, come in eight, appear, show; to spread, diffuse, be diffused; to have superior or extraordinary qualities, stand out, distinguish o.s., be distinguished, be marked; to excel, be outstanding (في in); to be an outstanding, exceptional man, be a genius
نبوغ nubūg eminence, distinction; superior or extraordinary qualities, exceptional faculties, giftedness, talent, genius; outstanding greatness, brilliancy, genius (of an artistic achievement)
نابغ nābig outstanding, distinguished; gifted, talented; man of genius, brilliant person
نابغة nābiga pl. نوابغ nawābig  a distinguished, famous, or outstanding man, a poetic genius
نبق nabq, nibq, nabaq, nabiq (coll.; n. un. ة) nabk, a Christ’s-thorn (Zizyphus spina- christi; bot.); lotus fruit; lotu. blossom
anābīq  انابيق pl. inbīq anbīq, انبيق
alembic, distilling flask
نبكة nabka, nabaka hill, hillock
نبل nabala u (nabl) to shoot arrows (ه at s.o.);
-- nabula u (نبالة nabāla) to be noble, noble-minded, generous, magnanimous, highborn, patrician; to be above s.th. (عن), be too high-minded to stoop to (عن)
نبل nabl (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. نبال nibāl,
انبال anbāl arrows
نبل nubl and نبالة nabāla nobility, nobleness, exalted, rank, or station, eminence; noble-mindedness, high- mindedness, magnanimity, generosity
نبل nabl and نبيل nabīl pl. نبال nibāl, نبالء nubalā’  noble; lofty. exalted, sublime, august; aristocratic, highborn, highbred, patrician, distinguished; noble-minded, high-minded, generous, magnanimous; excellent, outstanding, superior; magnificent, splendid, glorious; النبيل pl. النبالء (formerly:) title of members of the Egyptian royal family
 نابل and nabbāla نبالة pl. nabbāl نبال
nābil pl. نبل nubbāl archer, bowman
نبه nabaha u, nabiha a and nabuha u (نباھة nabāha) to be well-known, noted, renowned, famous; -- nabiha a (nabah) to heed, mind, note, observe (ل s.th.), pay attention (ل to), take notice (ل of); to wake up, awaken II to call s.o.’s attention (ه) to ( الى or على), point out, show, indicate (الى or ه على to s.o. s.th.); to inform, tell, apprise, notify (الى or ه على s.o. of); to remind (ه الى
s.o. of); to inform, instruct, brief (ه على s.o. about); to warn, caution (ه s.o.); to wake, awakn, rouse (ه النوم من s.o. from sleep); to arouse, alert, stir up, excite, stimulate (ه s.o.) IV to awaken, rouse (ه s.o., ھ s.th.) V to perceive, notice, note, realize (ل or الى s. th.), become aware, become conscious (ل or الى of); to be alerted, have one’s attention drawn (ل or على الى، to), take notice (ل or على الى، of), pay attention (ل or على الى، to), be mindful, heedful (ل or الى، على of); to wake up, awaken; to come to, regain consciousness (with لنفسه li-nafsihī) VIII to be on one’s guard, be wary, cautious, careful; to be awake, alert, wakeful; to awaken, wake up; to perceive, notice, note, observe (الى or ل s.th.); to understand, realize, grasp, comprehend ( الى or ل s.th.); to be 940 aware, be conscious (الى or ل of s.th.); to pay attention (الى or ل to); to come to, regain consciousness (with لنفسه li-nafsihī)
نبه nubh insight, discernment, perception, acumen, sagacity; understanding, attention; vigilance, alertness
نبه nabih and نبيه nabīh pl. نبھاء nubahā’  noble, highborn, patrician; outstanding, eminent, distinguished, excellent; famous, renowned, celebrated; understanding, sensible, discerning, judicious, perspicacious
نباھة nabāha fame, renown, celebrity; exalted rank or station, eminence, nobility; vigilance, alertness; intelligence
منبھة manbaha a call to draw s.o.’s attention to s.th. (على), rousing call, incitement, impetus, incentive (على to)
تنبيه tanbīh rousing, awakening; excitation, stimulation, incitement,
arousing; warning, cautioning, alerting; notification, notice, information; admonition, exhortation, advice, counsel, briefing, instruction, direction; nota bene, note, remark, annotation (in books) │ آلة التنبيه horn (of an automobile, etc.)
تنبه tanabbuh awakening, wakefulness, alertness
انتباه intibāh attention, attentiveness; vigilance, watchfulness, alertness; foresight, circumspection, prudence, care, carefulness; caution; heed, notice, observance │ بانتباه attentively, carefully
نابه nābih noble, highborn, patrician; eminent; well-known, renowned, distinguished; famous, important
منبه munabbih awakening, rousing; warning, cautioning, alerting; excitant, stimulant; (pl. -āt) alarm clock; stimulus, stimulative agent, stimulant, excitant
متنبه mutanabbih awake, wakeful; alert, vigilant, watchful
منتبه muntabih awake, wakeful; alert, vigilant, watchful; attentive, heedful; careful, prudent, cautious, wary, guarded
نبو) نبا) nabā u (نبو nabw, nubūw) to be far off, distant, remote; to move away, withdraw in the distance; to mill (arrow, عن the target); to bounce off, rebound, bounce, bound (عن الى from-to; ball); to disagree ( عن with); to be contradictory (عن to), to conflict, be in conflict, be inconsistent (عن with); to be offensive, repugnant (عن to s.o.); to dislike, find repugnant (عن s.th.)
│ المكان به نبا (makānu) he felt unable to remain in the place
نبي nabīy pl. -ūn, انبياء anbiyā’  prophet
wood guaiacum خشب األنبياء │
نبوي nabawī prophetic, of or pertaining to a prophet or specifically to the Prophet Mohammed
نبوة nubūwa prophethood, prophecy
ناب nābin repugnant, distasteful, improper, ugly
نتأ nata’a a (نتء nat’, نتوء nutū’) to swell; to bulge, bulge out; to protrude, project, jut out, stand out, be prominent, protuberant, embossed, in relief
 نتأة nat’a hill, hillock, elevation
نتوء nutū’ swelling, intumescence; growth, tumor; outgrowth, excrescence; protrusion, projection, protuberance, prominence, bulge; hill, hillock, elevation
│ الجبھة نتوء n. al-jabha salient, bulge in the front line (mil.)
ناتئ nati’ pl. نواتئ nawāti’  swelling, swollen; protruding, projecting, jutting out, salient, protuberant, bulging; bulge, hump, protuberance │ كعبري ناتئ (ku‘burī) wristbone
ناتئة nāti’a pl. نواتئ nawāti’  projection, protrusion, jut, prominence; outgrowth, excrescence, protuberance; hump, elevation 941
نتج nataja i (نتاج nitāj) to bear, bring forth, throw (ھ a young one); to proceed, derive, arise, follow, ensue, result (من or عن from), be the result of (من or عن) IV to bear, throw (ھ a young one); to bring forth, yield, generate, produce, make, manufacture, fabricate, create, originate, cause, provoke, bring about, occasion (ھ s.th.), give rise (ھ to) X to conclude, gather, infer, deduce, derive, trace (ھ من s.th. from), draw a conclusion (من from)
نتاج nitāj (act or process of) bearing, throwing, littering (of animals); brood, litter, offspring, young ones, young animals │ الخيل نتاج n. al-kail foal(s)
نتيجة natīja pl. نتائج natā’ij  result, upshot, issue, outcome, consequence; product, effect, immediate result, fruits, yield, proceeds, gain, profit; (techn.) output; conclusion, inference, deduction; almanac, calendar; natījata (prep.) because of, as a result of, due to, owing to
│ بالنتيجة consequently, hence, therefore; الجيب نتيجة n. al-jaib pocket calendar; نتيجة الحائط wall calendar
إنتاج intāj generation; making, manufacture; production; rearing, raising, breeding, growing, cultivation; productivity; creating, creation, creative activity; output (of a machine; O in mining) │ األدبي اإلنتاج (adabī) literary production; اإلنتاج رسم rasm al-i. excise tax
استنتاج istintāj pl. -āt inference, conclusion; deduction
ناتج nātij resultant, resulting, following, ensuing, proceeding, deriving, arising (عن from); result; maker, producer
منتوج mantūj pl. -āt product, creation, work, production
منتج muntij bearing, giving birth, producing; fruitful, productive; fertile, fecund, prolific; conclusive (evidence); maker, manufacturer, producer; film, producer
منتجات muntajāt proceeds, returns, yields, products │ زراعية منتجات (zirā‘īya) agricultural products, farming products, produce
مستنتج mustantij maker, manufacturer, producer
نتحة natḥa exudation
 نتر natara u (natr) to grab, grasp, wrest away, take away by force (ھ s.th.)
  نترات nitrāt nitrate
نتروجين nitrōjēn nitrogen
نتش nataša i (natš) to pull out, extract (ھ s.th.); to pluck out, tear out (ھ s.th.); to snatch away; to beat, strike, hit
منتاش mintāš tweezers, pincette
نتع nata‘a u i (نتوع nutū‘) to well up, bubble  up, trickle out, ooze out, dribble, trickle; -- (eg.) to lift up, carry away (ه s.o.)
نتف natafa i (natf) to pluck out, pull out, tear out (ھ hair, and the like) II do.
نتفة nutfa pl. نتف nutaf tuft of hair; a small amount, a little of s.th.
نتيف natīf pulled out, torn out; plucked
نتن natana i, natina a (natn) and natuna u (نتانة natāna, نتونة nutūna) to have an offensive smell, be malodorous, stink; to decompose, rot, decay, become putrid II to render putrid, putrefy (ھ s.th.); to cause to decay or rot, decompose (ھ s.th.) IV = I
نتن natn and نتانة natāna stench, evil smell, malodor; rotting, putrescence, putrefaction, decomposition; decay
نتن natin stinking, evil-smelling, malodorous; rotten, putrid, putrescent, putrefied, decayed, decomposed; (eg.) miserly, closefisted, stingy, niggardly 942
 منتن munattan putrefied, putrescent, rotten, decayed, decomposed
منتن muntin stinking, evil-smelling, malodorous; rotting, putrescent, putrid, decayed
نثر natara u i (natr, نثار nitār) to scatter, disperse, strew, sprinkle (ھ على s.th. over or on); to write in prose (ھ s.th.) II to scatter, disperse, strew about (ھ s.th.) VI and VIII to be scattered, about, be strewn about, be dispersed; to scatter, disperse; to fall off, fall out
نثر natr scattering, dispersal, dispersion; prose
نثر natrī prose, prosaic, in prose; small, little, insignificant, trifling, petty; نثريات sundries, miscellany │ نثرية مصاريف incidental expenses; petty expenses
نثار nattār scattered fragments; floating particles (dust); tiny pieces; O confetti
نثر natīr scattered, dispersed
تناثر tanātur dispersion (e.g., of a machine gun)
ناثر nātir prose writer, prosaist
منثور mantūr scattered, dispersed, strewn about; prosaic, prose; wall-flower, gillyflower (Cheiranthus cheiri; bot.); see also ھباء habā’
متناثر mutanātir scattered
نجب najuba u (نجابة najāba) to be of noble birth, be highborn, aristocratic, patrician, noble, distinguished, excellent, highminded, generous, magnanimous IV do.; to give birth (ه to a child), bear (ه a child); to beget, sire (ه s.o.) │ منھا انجب he had children by her VIII and X to choose, select, pick out (ھ s.th.)
نجب najb and نجبة nujaba noble, highminded, generous, magnanimous
نجابة najāba nobility, nobleness, noble descent, exalted rank or station, eminence; excellence, superiority, perfection
نجيب najīb pl. نجب nujub, نجباء nujabā’ , انجاب anjāb of noble breed; highborn, highbred, of noble descent, noble, distinguished, aristocratic, patrician; excellent, superior, outstanding
نجاب najjāb dromedary rider, courier
انتجاب intijāb choice; selection
نجح najaḥa a (najḥ, nujḥ, نجاح najāḥ) to turn out well, come off well, succeed; to progress well, develop satisfactorily; to succeed, have success (في in), be successful; to pass (االمتحان في the examination) II and IV to give (ه s.o.) successful (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) succeed, render successful (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), make (ھ s.th.) a success
نجح nujḥ favorable, successful outcome, happy ending; success; satisfactory development, good progress
نجاح najāḥ favorable, successful outcome, happy ending; success; satisfactory development, good progress; passing (of an examination) │ نجاحا لقي (laqiya) to have success, be successful, succeed, meet with success
نجيح najīḥ sound, good (advice, opinion)
انجاح injāḥ success
ناجح nājiḥ successful; passing, having passed (examination)
نجد najada i (najd) to help, aid, assist, support (ه s.o.), stand by s.o. (ه), najida a (najad) to sweat, perspire II to furnish (ھ s.th.); to upholster (ھ s.th.), to comb, card, tease ( القطن al-quṭna cotton) III = najada IV = najada; to travel in the highland (of Arabia) X to ask for help (ه s.o.), appeal for help) to s.o.), seek aid (ه or ب from s.o.), to take liberties, make bold (على with s.o.) ٣٤٩ ه
نجد najd pl. نجاد nijād highland, upland, tableland, plateau; the Arabian highland,
Nejd
نجدي najdī Nejd, Nejdi, native of Nejd
نجدة najda pl. najadāt help, aid, succor, assistance, support; emergency, crisis, trouble, difficulty, distress, calamity; courage, bravery, intrepidity, undauntedness, pl. auxiliaries, reinforcements │ النجدة !النجدة! help! help! النجدة بوليس approx.: riot squad (Eg.)
tall of tall, طويل النجاد │ belt sword نجاد stature
 نجاد nijād upholsterer; (pl. نجادة) a kind of boy scout (syr.)
نجادة nijāda upholsterer’s trade, upholstery
تنجيد tanjīd upholstering, upholstery work
نجذ najada i (nad) to importune (ه s.o.)
مناجذ manājid   moles (zool.)
ناجذ nājid pl. نواجذ nawājd  molar │ ابدى نواجذه عن (abdā) to show one’s teeth, display a hostile, threatening attitude (ل toward s.o.); بالنواجذ عض (‘aḍḍa) to grit one’s teeth; ناجذيه على عض (nājidaihi) to have reached the age of manhood; عض على بالنواجذ to cling stubbornly to ..., stick doggedly to ...
نجر najara u (najr) to hew, carve, plane (ھ wood)
نجر najr heat, hot time of the day
نجار najjār pl. -ūn carpenter, cabinetmaker, joiner
نجار nujār origin, descent, stock, root
نجارة nujāra wood shavings
نجارة nijāra woodworking, cabinetwork, joinery, carpentry
منجر minjar pl. مناجر manajir  plane (tool)
منجور manjūr pulley; sheave; waterwheel; woodwork, paneling, wainscoting
نجز najaza u (najz) to carry out, execute, implement, realize, accomplish, fulfill, complete (ھ s.th.); -- najiza a (najaz) to be carried out, be executed, be implemented, be realized, be accomplished, be completed, be achieved II to carry out, execute, implement, realize, effect(uate}, accomplish (ھ s.th.); to fulfill, grant, answer (ھ a wish, and the like) III to fight, battle, struggle (ه against s.o.) IV to carry out, execute, implement, realize, effect(uate), accomplish, complete, consummate (ھ s.th.); to do (ھ work, a job); to perform (ھ an action, an operation); to fulfill (ھ a promise), discharge (ھ a duty); to finish (على s.o.)
off, deal (على s.o.) the deathblow X to ask for the fulfillment (ھ of a promise)
نجز najz and نجاز najāz execution, implementation, realization, effectuation, completion, consummation, accomplishment, achievement, fulfillment, discharge
تنجيز tanjīz and انجاز injāz execution, implementation, realization, effectuation, accomplishment, achievement, completion, consummation; performance; fulfillment, discharge
مناجزة munājaza and تناجز tanājuz fight, struggle, contention, strife
ناجز nājiz completed; full, total, whole, entire, complete, consummate
نجس najusa u (نجاسة najāsa) and najisa a (najas) to be impure, unclean, soiled, dirty, sullied, stained, tainted II and IV to soil, sully, dirty, pollute, contaminate, defile, stain, taint (ھ s.th.) V to be or become impure, unclean, soiled, sullied, polluted, contaminated, defiled, stained, 944 tainted; to sully o.s., contaminate o.s., defile o.s.
نجس najas and نجاسة najāsa impurity, uncleanness, uncleanliness, dirt, filth, squalor
نجس najis pl. انجاس anjās impure, unclean, defiled, polluted, contaminated, soiled, sullied, dirty, filthy, squalid
نجس najis and نجيس najīs incurable, fatal (disease)
تنجيس tanjīs soiling, sullying, defilement, contamination, pollution
نجاشي najāšī, nijāšī Negus, Emperor of Ethiopia
نجع naja‘a a (naj‘, نجوع nujū‘) to be useful, beneficial, salutary, have a wholesome effect II and IV do. VIII to take refuge (ه with s.o.), resort, have recourse (ه to); to seek (ھ rest, and the like) X to seek (ھ pasture, rest, relaxation)
نجع naj‘ pl. نجوع nujū‘ hamlet, small village
نجعة nuj‘a search for food
 نجيع najī‘ useful, beneficial; wholesome, healthful, salubrious, salutary; -- blood
ناجع nāji‘ useful, beneficial; wholesome, healthful, salubrious, salutary
منتجع muntaja‘ refuge, retreat; recreation center; health resort, rest center, convalescent home, sanatorium
نجف najaf pl. نجاف nijāf (sand) hill, dune; dam, dike, levee; النجف an-najaf An Najaf (town in central Iraq)
نجفة najafa pl. -āt chandelier, luster
نجل najala u (najl) to beget, sire, father (ه a son)
نجل najl pl. انجال anjāl offspring, descendant, scion, son; progeny, issue
نجيل najīl pl. نجل nujūl a variety of orchard grass (Dactylis; bot.); herbage
انجل anjal , f.	نجالالءnajlā’  large-eyed; large, big, wide (eye); gaping (wound) │ نجالء طعنة (ṭa‘na) a blow causing a gaping wound; heavy blow or thrust
منجل minjal pl. مناجل manajil  scythe, sickle
منجلة manjala vise
  انجيل look up alphabetically
نجم najama u (نجوم nujūm) to appear, come in sight, rise (star), begin, commence, set in; to result, follow, ensue, arise, proceed, derive, originate, spring (عن or من from) │ قرنه نجم (qarnuhū) to begin to show II to observe the stars; to predict the future from the stars, practice astrology; to pay in installments V to observe the stars, predict the future from the stars
نجم najm pl. نجوم nujūm installment, partial payment; نجوما nujūman in installments
نجم najm pl. نجم nujūm, انجم anjum celestial body; star; lucky star; constellation, asterism; (coll.) herbs, herbage, grass │ ذنب ذو نجم (dū danab) comet; السينما نجوم film stars, movie stars
نجمة najma pl. najamāt star; asterisk (typ.) │ سينمائية نجمة film star, movie star; النجمة مرض maraḍ an-n. a disease afflicting horses
نجمي najmī star-shaped, stelliform, starlike, stellate, stellular, stellar, astral; -- in installments, installment- (in compounds)
نجيمة nujaima small star, starlet
نجام najjām and منجم munajjim pl. -ūn
astrologer
منجم manjam pl. مناجم manājim  source, origin; mine; pit
تنجيم tanjīm astrology 945
نجو) نجا) najā u (najw, نجاء najā’, نجاة najāh) to save o.s., be saved, be rescued, make for safety, get away (من from), escape (من s.th.), he delivered (من from) │ بنفسه نجا (bi-nafsihī) or بروحه نجا (bi-rūḥihī) to save
o.s. (من from); بحياته نجا (bi-ḥayātihī) to save one’s life, save one’s skin; -- (najw, نجوى najwan) to entrust a secret (ه to s.o.) II and IV to deliver, save, fescue, bring to safety (ه s.o., من from) III to whisper (ه ب to s.o. s.th.), entrust (ه ب to s.o. s.th. secret), take into one’s confidence (ه s.o.), confide (ه in s.o.) │ نفسه ناجى (nafsahū) to soliloquize, talk to o.s., say to o.s. VI to whisper to each other, carry on a whispered conversation, converse intimately, confidentially, exchange secrets, exchange ideas VIII to whisper into each other’s ear (ھ s.th.) X to save
o.s. (من from), escape (من s.th.); to he delivered (من from)
نجا najan deliverance, release, rescue
نجاة najāh escape, flight; deliverance, rescue; salvation, redemption; safety
نجو najw excrement
نجوة najwa pl. نجاء najā’ elevation, rising ground, upland │ من نجوة في free from, far from, a long way from
najāwā نجاوى pl. najwā نجوى
confidential talk, secret conversation
نجي najīy pl. انجية anjiya secret; confident, intimate friend, bosom friend
منجى manjan safety, security (من from)
منجاة manjāh pl. مناج manājin safe place, haven, refuge; safeguard, protection; rescue, salvation │ من بمنجاة كان to he safe from, he secure from, he safeguarded against
 تنجية tanjiya rescue, salvation, deliverance
مناجاة munājāh secret conversation; confidential talk │ األرواح مناجاة spiritism, spiritualism
منج munajjin rescuer, savior, deliverer
نحب naḥaba i a (naḥb, نحيب naḥīb) and VIII to sob, weep, cry, wail, lament
نحب naḥb weeping, crying, sobbing. sighing, moaning, wail(ing), lamentation; time, period, term, span, interval; death │ نحبه قضى qaḍā naḥbahū to fulfill one’s vow, redeem one’s pledge; to pass away, die, expire
نحب naḥīb loud weeping, wail(ing), lamentation
نحت naḥata i u (naḥt) to hew, dress (ھ stone or wood), plane, smooth, face; to carve, cut out, hew out, chisel, sculpture; to form, coin (ھ s.th.)
نحت naḥt wood or stone dressing, woodwork, stonework; sculpturing, sculpture
نحات stonemason, stonecutter, stone dresser; sculptor
نحاتة nuḥāta shavings, parings, chips, splinters, slivers
منحت minḥat pl. مناحت manāḥit  chisel
نحر naḥara u (naḥr) to cut the throat (ھ of an animal) slaughter, butcher, kill (ھ an animal) VI to fight; to kill each other, hack each other to pieces, engage in internecine fighting VIII to commit suicide; O to be scuttled (ship) │ شنقا انتحر (šanqan) to hang o.s., commit suicide by hanging
نحر naḥr killing, slaughter(ing), butchering │ النحر يوم yaum an-n. Day of Immolation (on the 10  of Zu’lhijja)
نحر naḥr pl. نحور nuḥūr upper portion of the chest, throat 946
نحر niḥr, and نحرير niḥrīr pl. نحارير naḥārīr  skilled, adept, proficient, versed, experienced (في in)
نحير naḥīr, and منحور manḥūr killed, slaughtered, butchered
منحر manḥar throat, neck
انتحار intiḥār suicide; O scuttling
منتحر muntaḥir suicide (person)
نحيزة naḥīza nature, natural disposition │ طيب النحيزة ṭayyib an-n. good-natured, good- humored; النحيزة كريم high-minded, noble- minded, of generous disposition
نحس naḥasa a (naḥs) to make (ه s.o.) unhappy, bring (ه s.o.) bad luck; -- naḥusa u (نحوسة nuḥūsa, نحاسة naḥāsa) and naḥisa a (naḥas) to be unlucky, ominous, ill-fated, calamitous, ill-boding, portend evil II to covert coat, or sheathe with copper, to copper (ھ s.th.)
نحس naḥs pl. نحوس nuḥūs misfortune, calamity, disaster
نحس naḥs, naḥis unlucky, luckless, ominous, calamitous, disastrous, ill-fated, ill-starred, sinister, ill-omened, ill-boding
نحاس naḥḥās coppersmith
نحاس nuḥās copper; (tun.) a small coin
brass (aṣfar ) نحاس اصفر │
مناحس manāḥis  ominous events
منحوس manḥūs luckless, ill-fated, star- crossed
نحف naḥufa a (نحافة naḥāfa) to be thin, slim, slender, lean, skinny; to become thin, lose weight IV to make thin, weaken, debilitate, enervate, emaciate
نحافة naḥāfa leanness, thinness, slenderness, slimness. enervation. emaciation, wasting away
نحيف naḥīf pl. نحاف niḥāf, نحفاء nuḥfā’  thin, slim, slender, slight; delicate, of fragile build; lean, gaunt, enervated, debilitated, emaciated
منحف manḥaf dieting resort, weight- reducing resort
منحوف manḥūf thin, slim, slender, slight; lean, gaunt, enervated, debilitated,
emaciated
نحل naḥala u a, naḥula u and naḥila a ( نحول nuḥūl) to be emaciated; to waste away, lose weight, grow thin; -- naḥala a (nuḥl) to make a donation, make a present (ه to s.o.); to ascribe, attribute, impute
 (wrongly, unduly) (ه ھ to s.o. s.th.) IV to make thin, enervate, emaciate (ه s.o.); to weaken (ھ s.th.) V and esp. VIII to ascribe to o.s., claim for o.s. (لنفسه), assume unduly, presume, arrogate to o.s. ( ھ s.th.); to embrace (ھ a religion); to borrow, adopt, take over (ھ foreign words); to take up (ھ s.th.) │ اإلسالم انتحل to profess Islam; اسمه انتحل (ismahū) to assume s.o.’s name; األعرابية انتحل (a‘rabīya) to claim to be a Bedouin; انتحل األعذار (a‘dār) to think up excuses, make excuses, use pretexts or subterfuges; انتحل فالن شخصية (šakšīyata) to pass o.s. off as s.o., purport to be ..., impersonate s.o.
نحل naḥl (coll.; n. un. ة) bee
نحلة naḥla pl. نحل niḥal present, gift, donation; creed, faith, seat
نحال naḥḥāl beekeeper, apiarist, apiculturist
نحالة niḥāla beekeeping, apiculture
نحول nuḥūl leanness, skinniness, thinness, slimness, slenderness; enervation, emaciation, wasting away
نحيل naḥīl and ناحل nāḥil pl. نحلى naḥlā, نحل nuḥḥal thin, slim, slender, lean, skinny; enervated, emaciated, gaunt
منحل manḥal pl. مناحل manāḥil  beehive; apiary, apicultural station 947
انتحال intiḥāl undue assumption, arrogation; literary theft, plagiarism
منتحل muntaḥil plagiarist
منتحل muntaḥal: منتحل اسم (ism) assumed name, alias, pseudonym, nom de guerre
نحم naḥama i (naḥm, نحيم naḥīm, نحمان naḥamān) to clear one’s throat; to wheeze, pant, gasp
نحام nuḥām flamingo
نحن naḥnu we
نحنح naḥnaḥa and II tanaḥnaḥa to clear one’s throat, to hem, say “ahem”
نحنحة naḥnaḥa hem, hawk, little cough
نحو) نحا) naḥā a u (naḥw) to wend one’s way ( ھ ه، to), go, walk, move, turn (ھ ه، to, toward), take the road (ھ to), go in the direction (ھ of) │ نحوه نحا (naḥā naḥwahū)
to follow s.o., follow s.o.’s example, be guided by s.o. or s.th.; to imitate s.o.; to be of the same nature, of the same kind, on the same line as ..., be like ...; الباب نحو نحا to walk toward the door; الباب نحو به نحا to show s.o. to the door II to put aside, push away, brush aside (ھ s.th.); to remove, take away (ھ من s.th. from) IV to turn away, avert (عن بصره baṣarahū ‘an one’s eyes from); to turn (على against s.o.), assail, overcome (على ب s.o. with); to help (على ب upon s.o. reproach, or the like), shower (على ب s.o. with); to turn, apply
o.s. attend (على to s.th.) V to step aside, go away, withdraw, move away, fall back (من or من from); to turn away; to forgo, renounce, waive (من s.th.); to abandon, give up, surrender, yield, relinquish (عن s.th.); to retreat, retire (ھ to a place); to lean, rest, support o.s. (ل on) VIII to turn ( ھ to, toward); to lean, support o.s. (ل on)
do., انتحى جانبا aside; turn to انتحى ناحية │ retire withdraw, back, step
نحو naḥw pl. انحاء anḥā’ direction; side; section, part; way, course, method, manner, mode, fashion; (with foll. genit.) corresponding to, analogous to, similar to, like, somewhat like; (gram.) grammar; syntax │ ما نحو على (naḥwi) in the manner of, as; ما نحو على (naḥwin) rather, pretty much; النحو ھذا على in this manner, this way; in this respect; النحو ھذا وعلى and so forth, and so on; السابعة الساعة نحو في at about the seventh hour, at about 7 o’clock, around seven; نحوي من as far as I am concerned, as for me, for my part, I for one; من نحوا (naḥwan) approximately, roughly, about, circa (with foll. figure); في األرض انحاء (a. il-arḍ) all over the earth; في المعمورة) العالم انحاء كل) (‘ālam) all over the world; المقارن النحو (muqārin) comparative grammar
نحو naḥwa (prep.) in the direction of, toward, to; according to, in analogy with, similar to, like, as, as for instance; approximately, roughly, about, around, circa
نحوي naḥwī syntactical; grammatical; grammarian; philologist
منحى manḥan pl. مناح manāḥin aim, goal, object, end, purpose; manner of acting, mode of conduct, behavior;
 direction; (rhetorical, literary) form; field, domain, realm, province, bailiwick, sphere (fig.) │ الحياة مناحي m. l-ḥayāh walks of life
ناح nāḥin pl. نحاة nuḥāh grammarian; philologist
ناحية nāḥiya pl. نواح nawāḥin side; direction; viewpoint, standpoint, aspect; region, area, section; sphere, domain, field; district, canton; (Ir.) subdivision of a قضاء qaḍā’, roughly corresponding to a county; off side, secluded part, corner (e.g., of a room); nāḥiyata in the direction of, toward, to │ ناحية من with regard to, in respect to, as to, as for, 948 concerning, regarding, on the part of; اخرى ناحية من (ukrā) on the other hand; العسكرية الناحية من (‘askarīya) from a military standpoint; من قانونية ناحية de jure; واقعية ناحية من (wāqi‘īya) de facto; النواحي سليم sound in body; متعدد النواحي muta‘addid an-n. many-sided; من النواحي جميع in every respect
نخ nakk pl. انخاخ ankāk mat; rug, carpet
نخب nakaba u (nakb) and VIII to select, pick, choose (ھ s.th.); to choose, make one’s choice; to vote, go to the polls; to elect (ه s.o.)
نخب nakb selection, choice; a drink to s.o.’s health │ نخب شرب (šariba) to drink to s.o.’s health, toast s.o.
نخبة nukba pl. نخب nukab selected piece, selected item, selected passage; the pick, cream, elite, flower
انتخاب intikāb pl. -āt election (pol.); choice; selection
انتخابي intikābī of or pertaining to an election or elections, election (used attributively); elective; electoral │ معركة انتخابية (ma’raka) election campaign
ناخب nākib and منتخب muntakib pl. -ūn
elector (esp., pol.), voter, constituent
منخوب mankūb lean, emaciated
منتخب muntakab chosen, elected, selected, hand-picked; elected candidate; (pl. -āt) team (in sports); منتخبات = selected pieces, selected items, selected passages
نخر nakara u i (nakr, نخير nakīr) to snort; to snore; to gnaw (ل on s.th.), bore, burrow, eat (في into s.th.; worm); to eat
away (ھ at s.th.); to enervate, sap, ruin, decay (ھ s.th.); -- nakira a (nakar) to be eaten away, worm-eaten, rotten, decayed, full of holes; to spoil, rot, decay; to decompose, disintegrate, crumble
نخر nakr snorting, snort; snoring, snore; decay, rot, rottenness; tooth decay, caries
نخر nakr and ناخر nākir worm-eaten; rotting, decaying
نخير nakīr snort(ing), snoring, snore; grunt(s)
منخر mankar, mankir, minkar pl. مناخر
manākir  nostril; nose
منخار minkār pl. مناخير manākīr  nostril; nose
نخرب nakraba to eat holes into s.th. (ھ), eat away (ھ at); to hollow out (ھ s.th.)
نخروب nukrūb pl. نخاريب nakārīb  hole; cavity, hollow; cell; honeycomb
نخز nakaza a (nakz) to bore into or through s.th. (ھ; worm)
نخس nakaaa a u (naks) to prick, goad, prod, urge on, drive on (ھ an animal)
نخس nakkās drover; cattle dealer; slave trader; white slaver
نخاسة nikāsa cattle trade; slave trade; white-slave traffic
منخس minkas pl. مناخس manākis  spur, goad, prod (for driving cattle)
منخاس minkās pl. مناخيس manākīs  spur, goad, prod (for driving cattle)
نخشوش nakšūš pl. نخاشيش nakāšīš  gill, branchia (respiratory organ of fish)
نخع V to clear one’s throat, hawk, spit out, expectorate
نخاع nukā‘, nikā‘ pl. نخع nuku‘ spinal marrow, spinal cord; bone marrow, medulla; brain
نخاعة nukā’a phlegm, mucus, sputum, expectoration
نخل nakala u (nakl) to sift, bolt, sieve out (ھ s.th.); to strain (ھ s.th.) V and VIII do. 949
نخل nakl (coll.; n. un. ة) and نخيل nakīl
palm; date palm
 نخالة nukāla residue left in a sieve; bran; waste, refuse │ نخالة اذنه ملء يساوي ال lā yusāwī mil’a udnihī nukālatan he isn’t worth a bent nickel
منخل mankal, munkul pl. مناخل manākil 
sieve
نخم nakama a (nakam) and V to clear one’s throat, hawk, spit out, expectorate
نخامة nukāma phlegm, mucus, sputum, expectoration
نخامية غدة gudda nukāmīya hypophysis, pituitary body (anat.)
نخو) نخا) nakā u (نخوة nakwa) to be proud, haughty, supercilious (على toward s.o.) II and IV to inflame, incite, excite, stimulate, arouse, awaken (ھ s.th.)
نخوة nakwa haughtiness, arrogance; pride, dignity, sense of honor, self-respect; high-mindedness, generosity
ند nadda i (nadd, ندد nadad, نداد nidād, ندود nudūd, نديد nadīd) to run away, flee; to slip away; to slip out (exclamation); to escape (عن s.o.) II to expose, show up, compromise (ب s.o.); to criticize (ب s.o. or s.th.), find fault (ب with)
ند nadd high hill; -- nadd, nidd incense (of aloeswood, with ambergris, musk and frankincense)
ند nidd pl. انداد andād equal, (a)like, same; an equal, a peer; partner; antagonist, rival
نديد nadīd pl. ندداء nudadā’  equal; rival
تنديد tandīd pl. -āt criticism; revilement, abuse, disparagement, defamation
ندب nadaba u (nadb) to mourn, lament, bewail (ه the deceased); to appoint, assign (ه ل s.o. to an office), detail (ه ل s.o. for a job, for a task); to send as a representative or delegate, to delegate, depute, deputize (ه s.o.); to commission, charge, entrust (ه s.o., ب with); -- nadiba a (nadab) to scar over, cicatrize, heal IV = nadiba VIII to appoint, assign (ه ل s.o. to an office), detail (ه ل s.o. for a job, for a task); to commission, charge, empower, authorize ( ه ل s.o. to do s.th., ب with), order (ه ل s.o. to do s.th.); to entrust (ه ل to s.o. a task); (mil.) to detach, detail, transfer (ه ل s.o.
to); (with نفسه nafsahū) to apply o.s., devote o.s. dedicate o.s. (ل to s.th.); to give (ھ a country) the mandate (على over); to comply readily (ل with an order or instruction), be willing, be prepared, stand ready (ل to); to present o.s. (الى to s.o.), turn (الى toward, to)
ندب nadb weeping, wailing, lamentation; lament, dirge, elegy; assignment, commissioning, delegation, deputation; appointment, authorization, mandation
nudūb ندوب andāb, انداب pl. nadab ندب
scar, cicatrice
nudūb ندوب andāb, انداب pl. nadba ندبة
scar, cicatrice; scabby wound
ندبة nudba lamentation for the dead; elegy; dirge, funeral song
ندابة nadāba pl. -āt hired female mourner
مندب mandab pl. منادب manādib  wail, lamentation │ المندب باب Bab el Mandeb (strait between SW Arabia and Africa; geogr.)
انتداب intidāb deputation, appointment; commissioning, charging, authorization; detailing, detachment, assignment, mission; (pl. -āt) mandate (over a territory); mandatory rule │ االنتداب دولة daulat al-int. mandatory power; لجنة االنتدابات lajnat al-int. Mandate Commission (of the League of Nations) 950
ادارة انتدابية │ mandatory intidābī انتدابي
(idāra) mandatory administration
نادبة nādiba pl. -āt, نوادب nawādib  hired female mourner
مندوب mandūb bewailed, bemoaned, mourned, lamented; regrettable, deplorable, lamentable; -- (pl. -ūn) deputy, delegate, agent, functionary, commissioner; representative; representative of the press, correspondent, reporter (of a newspaper); plenipotentiary, authorized agent; (Isl. Law) recommended
مندوب خاص agent; insurance مندوب التأمين │ (sāmin) مندوب سام envoy; special (kaṣṣ) مندوب فوق العادة Commissioner; High مندوب مفوض extraordinary; ambassador
 (mufawwaḍ) plenipotentiary, authorized agent; (dipl.) minister; ووزير العادة فوق مندوب مفوض ambassador extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary (official title of ambassadors)
مندوبية mandūbīya delegation; High Commission
منتدب muntadab deputized, delegated; commissioned, charged; entrusted; appointed; assigned, detailed │ منتدبة دولة (daula) mandatory power
ندح nadaḥa a (nadḥ) to extend, expand, enlarge (ھ s.th.)
ندحة nadḥa, nudḥa wide, open space; freedom (of action) │ عنه ندحة ال (nadḥata) it is indispensable, unavoidable, inevitable; عن ندحة لي اجد ال (ajidu, nadḥatan) I feel compelled to ...
مندوحة mandūḥa pl. منادح manādiḥ  and منتدح muntadaḥ alternative, choice; freedom of action │ له مندوحة ال (mandūḥata) it is indispensable, absolutely necessary, mandatory, imperative for him; منتدح) مندوحة عنه لك) it is up to you, it is optional for you; ير لو من مندوحة (lam yara mandūḥatan) to feel obligated, feel compelled to ...
  ندر nadara u (nadr, ندور nudūr) to be rare; to be uncommon, unusual; -- nadura u (ندارة nadāra) to be strange, odd, queer, unusual, extraordinary V to make fun (ب or على of); to joke, jest VI to tell each other stories and jokes
ندر nadr rare; strange, odd
ندرة nadra, nudra and ندورة nudūra rarity, rareness; nadratan rarely, seldom │ الندرة في rarely, seldom
اندر andar pl. انادر anādir  (tun.) threshing floor
اندر andar  rarer
مندرة mandara pl. منادر manādir  (tun.) threshing floor; see also below
منادرات munādarāt causeries on amusing, witty topics
تندر tanaddur amusement, fun-making, joking
تنادر tanādur gay chat
نادر nādir rare; infrequent; strange, odd, unusual, uncommon; excellent, precious, priceless; an eccentric, a crank, an odd fellow; نادرا nādiran rarely, seldom │ في النادر rarely, seldom; المثال نادر unparalleled, singular, unique; نادرة عملة (‘umla) specie, hard money
نادرة nādira pl. نوادر nawādir  rarity, rare thing, rare phenomenon; rare, uncommon word; phenomenon, prodigy, extraordinary person; funny, droll story, anecdote, joke; accident, incident
 □ مندرة mandara (for منظرة, esp. eg.) pl. منادر manādir  reception parlor for male visitors; مجالس =) منادر) parties
ندس nadasa u to throw down, bring to the ground (ه s.o.); to revile, defame, discredit (ه s.o.)
ندف nadafa i (nadf) to tease, comb, or card cotton 951
ندف nadf teasing, combing, carding (of cotton) │ الندف جھاز jahāz an-n. card, carding machine
ندفة nudfa pl. ندف nudaf flock (of wool); flake │ الثلج ندفة n. at-talj snowflake
نديف nadīf and مندوف mandūf carded, teased (cotton)
نداف naddāf cotton carder, cotton teaser
مندف mindaf pl. منادف manādif  teasing bow (for carding cotton)
ندل nadala u (nadl) to snatch away (ھ s.th.)
نذل = nadl ندل □
مندالة mindāla rammer
نادل nādil pl. ندل nudul waiter; servant who waits on table
 مندل mandal: المندل ضرب ḍarb al-m. (eg.) a magic practice in which a fortuneteller, or a medium, prophesies while contemplating a mirror-like surface
منديل look up alphabetically
ندم nadima a (nadam, ندامة nadāma) to repent ( على of), rue, regret (على s.th.) III to drink, carouse (ه with s.o.) V = I VI to drink together, carouse together
ندم nadam, ندامة nadāma remorse, repentance, regret
 نديم nadīm pl. ندماء nudamā’ , ندام nidām drinking companion; friend, intimate, confidant
ندمان nadmān pl. ندامى nadāmā repenting, repentant, rueful, remorseful, regretful
مندم mandam remorse, repentance, regret
منادمة munādama drinking companionship, intimate friendship
تندم tanaddum remorse, repentance, regret
نادم nādim pl. ندام nuddām repenting, repentant, rueful, remorseful, regretful
منادم munādim drinking companion, boon companion, intimate
متندم mutanaddim repenting, repent, ant, rueful, remorseful, regretful
نده nadaha a (nadh) to drive, urge, spur on (ه s.o.); to drive away (ه s.o.)
ندو) ندا) nadā u (nadw) to call (ه s.o.); to invite; to call together, convoke, convene, summon (ھ a meeting); to get together, meet, convene, assemble, gather; -- ندي nadiya a (ندى nadan, نداوة nadāwa, ندوة nudūwa) to be moist, damp, dewy, wet │ الجبين له يندى شيء an embarrassing or shocking thing, a disgraceful thing II to moisten, wet, bedew (ھ s.th.) III to shout, call out, cry out, exclaim; to call (ب or ه
s.o. or for s.o., also على), summon (ه s.o., also على); to call out, shout (ه to s.o.); to call for s.th. (ب), invite to s.th. (ب); to proclaim, announce (ب s.th.); to emphasize (ب s.th.); O to announce, act as
announcer (radio); to cry one’s wares, hawk (على s.th. to be sold) │ رئيسا به نودي (nūdiya) to be proclaimed president IV = II; to be noble, generous, magnanimous V to he moistened, he bedewed; to show o.s. generous, liberal, openhanded VI and VIII to get together, meet, convene, gather, assemble, form a club
ندوة nadwa council; debating group, study group; club │ الندوة دار city hall, town hall; parliament, house of representatives, chamber of deputies
nadāwa نداوة and nudūwa ندوة
moistness, moisture, dampness
ندى nadan pl. انداء andā’, اندية andiya moistness, moisture, dampness, wetness; dew; generosity, liberality, magnanimity 952
ند nadin and نديان nadyān  moist, damp
│ الكف ندم al-kaff generous, liberal, openhanded
ندى nadīy moist, damp; tender, delicate
│ الكف ندى al-kaff generous, liberal, openhanded
نداء nidā’ pl. -āt shout; call; exclamation; summons; public announcement; proclamation, appeal; address; vocative (gram.) │ االستغاثة نداء call for help, distress signal; النداء حرف ḥarf an-n. interjection (gram.); ل نداء اصدر (aṣdara) to issue s proclamation to
مناداة munādāh calling, shouting; call; vocative; public notice, announcement; proclamation │ المناداة بيع bai‘ al-m. public sale, auction
ناد nādin pl. اندية andiya, نواد nawādin club; circle; association; clubhouse │ ناد رياضي (riyāḍī) athletic club; النادي دار clubhouse
مندى munaddan wet, damp; bedewed, dewy; refreshing
مناد munādin caller; herald; town crier; auctioneer; O announcer (radio)












منادى munādan noun in the vocative (gram.)
مندية mundiya pl. -āt disgraceful, evil deed; insult, abuse, affront
 l.s.J.::... muntadan pl. u4,.J.::...o muntadayāt gathering place, assembly room; club
نذر nadara u i (nadr, نذور nudūr) to dedicate, consecrate (<I s.th. to God); to vow, make a vow │ ان <I نذرت I vow to God that ..., I swear by God that ...; ھ نفسه على نذر to vow to o.s., make the solemn pledge to ...; -- nadira a (nadar) to have been warned, be on one’s guard (ب against) IV to warn (ه ب
s.o. of or against), caution (ه ب s.o. against), admonish (ه s.o.); to announce (ب ه to s.o. s.th.), give notice or warning (ه ب to s.o. of), notify in advance (ه s.o., ب of)
│ منزله بتسليم انذره (bi-taslīmi manzilihī) he gave him notice to vacate the premises
نذر nadr pl. نذور nudur, نذورات nudūrāt vow, solemn pledge; votive offering, ex- voto
نذير nadīr pl. نذر nudur consecrated to God; vowed, solemnly pledged; warner; herald, harbinger, forerunner; warning; alarm │ O الخطر نذير n. al-kaṭar airraid warning
انذار indār pl. -āt warning; announcement, notice; admonition; air- raid warning, alarm │ O غارات بوقوع انذار جوية (bi-wuqū’ gārāt jawwiya) or انذار الجوية لألخطار (li-l-akṭār) air-raid warning; نھائي انذار (nihā’ī) ultimatum; O اإلنذار صفارة ṣaffārat al-i. warning siren
تناذر tanādur syndrome (med.)
ناذر nādir one who has made a vow
منذور mandūr solemnly pledged, vowed, consecrated to God
منذر mundir warner, cautioner
منذرة mundira alarm signal; warning sign (ب against)
نذل nadula u (نذالة nadāla, نذولة nudūla) to be low, base, mean, vile, despicable, debased, depraved
نذل nadl pl. انذال andāl, نذول nudūl low, base, mean, vile, despicable, debased, depraved; coward
نذيل nadīl pl. نذالء nudalā’  , نذال nidāl low, base, mean, vile, despicable, debased, depraved; coward
نذالة nadāla depravity
نربيج narbīj pl. نرابيج narābīj  mouthpiece of a narghile 953
نربيش narbīš pl. نرابيش narābīš  mouthpiece of a narghile
نرجس narjis, nirjis narcissus (bot.) نرد nard backgammon, tricktrack نردين nardīn nard, spikenard
نرفزة narfaza nervousness
منرفز munarfaz (pal.-syr.) nervous
نرنج naranj bitter orange
نروج nurūj, narūj Norway
نرويج nurwīj Norway
نرويجي nurwījī Norwegian
نز nazza i (nazz, نزيز nazīz) to seep, trickle, ooze, or leak, through; to vibrate (string)
نز nazz, nizz, نزازة nuzāza pl. نزوز nuzūz
seepage, leakage water
نز nazz swift, nimble, agile, lively, sprightly; changeable, inconstant, unsteady, fickle
نزة nazza, nizza (sensuous) passion, lust
نزيز nazīz unsteady, inconstant, unstable; sensuous, passionate
نزح nazaḥa a i (nazḥ, نزوح nuzūḥ) to be far off, be distant; to leave (من s.th.), depart, emigrate (or from); to immigrate (الى to); to wander, migrate, rove, roam, range; O to march off, pull out (troops); pass. به نزح nuziḥa bihī to emigrate, be away from home, live abroad; -- (nazḥ) and IV to scoop out, bail out, empty (ھ s.th.); to drain, dry out (ھ a well, a ditch, a latrine, and the like) VIII to emigrate
نزح nazḥ scooping out, emptying; draining, drainage
نزح nazaḥ pl. انزاح anzāḥ muddy water
نزوح nuzūḥ emigration
نزوح nazūḥ and نزيح nazīḥ far-off, faraway, distant, remote
نازح nāziḥ far-off, faraway, distant, remote; going away from home, moving to other lands, leaving for distant shores, emigrating; emigrant; one who scoops out, bails out or empties, a latrine cleaner
 نزر nazr and نزير nazīr little; insignificant, trivial, petty; trifle, small amount, insignificant number, negligible portion │ الحديث نزر taciturn, of few words; قليل نزر tiny amount
نزع naza‘a i (naz‘) to pull out, extract ( ھ s.th.); to remove, take, take away, strike, cross off (ھ عن s.th. from); to take off, shed (ھ a garment); to strip, divest, deprive, rob (من ھ or عن s.o. of s.th.); to wrest, take away (من ھ from s.o. s.th., possession, right, reputation, etc.); to remove (ه s.o. from a position), depose, dismiss, fire, cashier, demote, reduce in rank (ه s.o.); to adduce as proof or in refutation (ب s.th.); (intr.) to move, proceed, go, betake o.s., repair (الى to); to emigrate (الى to); -- (نزوع nuzū‘) to desire ( الى s.th.), wish, long, yearn, pine (الى for); to incline, tend, have an inclination or a tendency (الى to); to take on, take over, adopt (الى s.th.), resort (الى to; e.g., to a method); to absent o.s., depart (or from); to desist, abstain, refrain (or from), keep clear (عن of), give up, avoid, eschew (عن s.th.); to be in the throes of death │ منه نزع الى نازع (nāzi‘un) he felt a desire for ..., discovered his inclination to ... II to remove, take away (ھ s.th.) III to fight, struggle, contend, dispute (ه with s.o.), combat (ھ s.th.); to contest, challenge (في s.th.); to attempt to wrest (ه ھ from s.o. s.th.), contest (ه ھ s.o.’s right to s.th.); to be in the throes of death VI to contend with one another; to rival (ھ for s.th.), contest each other’s right (ھ to), carry on a 954 dispute, be at variance (ھ over) VIII to pull out, extract, pluck out, tear out (ھ s.th. .i- from); to match, wrest (من ھ from
1.o. s.th.), tear away, pull off (ھ من s.th. from); to take, draw, borrow (ھ s.th.); to be removed, be taken away
نزع naz‘ removal; withdrawal, elimination; deposition, removal from office; death struggle, agony of death │ السالح نزع disarming, disarmament; مؤتمر السالح نزع mu’tamar n. as-s. disarmament conference; الملكية نزع n. al-milkīya expropriation
نزعة naz‘a pl. naza‘āt inclination, tendency, leaning; attitude, position, stand
نزوع nuzū‘ striving, endeavor, longing, wish, desire (الى for)
نزاع nazzā‘ tending, having an inclination (الى to), leaning (الى toward)
نزيع nazī‘ pl. نزاع nuzzā‘ stranger
منزع manza‘ pl. منازع manāzi‘ intent, intention, purpose; aim, end, objective, goal; way, method; manner, behavior
منزع minza‘ arrow
نزاع nizā‘ fight, struggle, strife, contest, controversy; dispute; death struggle, agony of death │ نزاع بال (bi-lā) indisputably, incontestibly, incontrovertibly, indubitably, undeniably; نزاع عليه disputed, contested, debatable; ال فيه نزاع (nizā‘a) undisputed, uncontested, unquestioned
منازعة munāza‘a pl. -āt tight, struggle, strife, contention, controversy, quarrel, dissension, discord; dispute; matter in controversy, case at issue (before a court of justice)
تنازع tanāzu‘ tight, struggle, strife, contention, controversy │ البقاء تنازع t. al- baqā’ struggle for existence
انتزاع intizā‘ removal, withdrawal, elimination; dispossession, expropriation
نازعة nāzi‘a pl. نوازع nawāzi‘ tendency, inclination, leaning
منزوع manzū‘ removed, taken away │ السالح منزوعة منطقة (minṭaqa) demilitarized zone
منازع munāzi‘ struggling with death, being in the throes of death; contending, fighting, militant, litigious, renitent │ ليس في منازع من no one will deny that ...
عليه منازع munāza‘ ‘alaihi contested, disputed, debatable
متنازع mutanāzi‘ conflicting, clashing
عليه متنازع (mutanāza‘) and فيه متنازع contested, disputed, debatable; litigated matter, matter in controversy, case at issue
منتزع muntaza‘ taken, drawn (من from)
نزغ nazg and نزغة pl. nazagāt incitement to evil │ الشيطان نزغ n. aš-šaiṭān insinuations of the devil, satanic inspiration
 نزف nazafa i (nazf) to drain, exhaust, empty (ھ s.th.); to dry up (ھ a well); to draw off (ھ blood); to be drained, exhausted, spent; pass. دمه نزف nuzifa damuhū to lose much blood, bleed (to death) IV to drain, empty (ھ a well); to be exhausted X to drain off, draw, extract (ھ من s.th. from); to exhaust, consume, use up, swallow up, devour (ھ s.th.)
نزف nazf exhaustion, draining, emptying; hemorrhage; loss of blood │ O الدموي النزف (damawī) hemophilis (med.)
نزفة nuzfa small quantity, modicum (of a liquid)
نزيف nazīf weakened by loss of blood; bleeding, effusion of blood; hemorrhage, hemorrhea (med.)
منزوف manzūf exhausted through loss of blood 955
نزق nazaqa i (nazq) and naziqa a (nazaq, نزوق nuzūq) to storm ahead, rush forward; to be hasty, rash, precipitate, impetuous, lightheaded, frivolous, reckless, ruthless, II to spur on, urge on (ھ a horse)
نزق nazaq haste; rashness, precipitateness, impetuosity; lightheadedness, recklessness, thoughtlessness, frivolity
نزق naziq hasty; rash, precipitate, impetuous; thoughtless, heedless, careless, inattentive, lightheaded, frivolous, flighty, superficial
نزك nazaka u (nazk) to stab, pierce (ه s.o.)
نيزك naizak pl. نيازك nayāzik  short lance; shooting star, meteor
نزل nazala i (نزول nuzūl) to dismount, alight; to descend, go down, come down, move down, get down, step down, climb down; to get off (من, e.g., a train), get out, step out (من, e.g., of a car), debark, disembark ( من from a vessel); to put down, land (airplane); to fall (rain); to descend from heaven, be revealed (esp., the Koran); to fall, sink, sag (prices), drop (water level); to subside, abate, let up, decrease; to stop, or halt, for a rest, to camp; to stop, stop over, put up, take up quarters, take lodgings, lodge, room, stay to live (على or ب at s.o.’s home, also عند), live, dwell (ھ
in a place), inhabit (ھ a place); to step into the arena, take the field, meet an opposing team (sports); to give in, yield (على e.g., to s.o.’s pleas); to give up, renounce, resign ( ل عن s.th. in s.o.’s favor), cede, waive, relinquish, abandon (عن s.th.); to resign ( عن from); to refrain (عن from), forgo (عن s.th.); to descend, come (ب upon s.o.; misfortune, punishment, etc.), befall, hit, afflict (ب s.o.; misfortune), happen, occur (ب to s.o.); to fall (على upon s.o.), attack, assail, assault (على s.o.); to enter, embark ( على upon s.th.), set out (على to do s.th.), tackle, attack (على s.th.), pounce (على on s.th.); (with ب:) to take, bring, lead, etc.,
s.o. or s.th. down (الى to); -- nazila a (نزلة nazla) to have a cold │ البر الى نزل (barr)  to disembark, go ashore, land; الى نزل الميدان (maidān) to take the field; دون نزل مننلته (manzilatihī) to sink below one’s level; على ضيفا نزل (ḍaifan) to avail o.s. of s.o.’s hospitality, stay as a guest with s.o.; حكمه على نزل (ḥukmihī) to defer, give in, yield, submit to s.o.; to comply with the standard of s.th.; ارادته عند نزل (irādatihī) to defer to s.o.’s will, do s.o.’s bidding; نزل طلبه) رغبته عند) (ragbatihī, ṭalabihī) to comply with, or fulfill, s.o.’s wish or demand; منزال (manzilan) to occupy a place or position, get to a place or into a position; الالئق منزله نزل (manzilahū) to occupy one’s due place; فالن منزلة نزل (manzilata f.) to hold the position of, serve as II to cause to come down; to make (ه s.o.) descend, dismount, or step down; to lower, let down (ھ s.th., e.g., a bucket, a curtain, etc.); to send down (ھ على a revelation to a prophet), reveal (ھ s.th.); to take down, put down (ھ s.th.); to lower, decrease, diminish, lessen, minimize, curtail, reduce (ھ or من s.th.); to dip, tilt ( ھ s.th.); to lower, strike (ھ a flag); to relieve, divest, discharge (ھ عن s.o. of), depose, dethrone (ه العرش عن s.o.); to unload (ھ s.th.); to grant hospitality (ه to s.o.). receive hospitably, take in, put up, lodge, accumulate (ه s.o.); to deduct subtract (من ھ s.th. from); to insert, inlay ( ھ في s.th. in. e.g., ivory in wood); (Tun.) to cede (ھ s.th.) on the basis of inzāl (q.v.)
│ درجته نزل (darajatahū) to demote s.o., reduce s.o. in rank III to get into a fight, join issue, clash (ه with s.o.) IV to bring
 down, take down; to cause to descend, dismount, or step down; to send down. reveal (٦٥٩ ه على s.th. to s.o.; of God); to bestow, grant, give (ھ s.th.; of God); to make (ه s.o.) alight, stop, halt, camp, put up, tab up quarters, live, stay, abide (ھ in a place); to unload (ھ s.th.); to take ashore (ھ البر الى ilā l-barr s.th. from a vessel); to land, put ashore, disembark, debark (ھ troops); to lower, strike (ھ a flag); to abase, degrade; to lower, decrease, diminish, reduce (ھ الى number, price, etc., to); to cause (ب ھ to s.o. loss), inflict (ب ھ upon s.o. a loss); to compel, force, coerce (ه على s.o. to) │ سلطان من به ﷲ انزل ما (sulṭān) (lit.: God has given it no power, i.e.) futile, vain, fruitless, unavailing, unfounded, absurd, preposterous, completely arbitrary, random; البحر الى انزل (baḥr) to launch (ھ a ship); ضيوفا انزلوھم عليھم (ḍuyūfan) they took them in as guests; قادحة خسارة به انزل (kusāratan fāḍiḥatan) to inflict a heavy loss on s.o.; فالن منزلة انزله (manzilata f.) he had him occupy the same position as, gave him the same status as, made him equal in rank with V to lower o.s., stoop, condescend ( الى to s.th.); to abase o.s., humble o.s., demean o.s., eat crow; to give up, renounce, resign, waive, forgo (عن s.th.), refrain (عن from) VI to give up, renounce, resign, waive, forgo (ل عن s.th. in favor of), refrain (عن from), yield, surrender, abandon, relinquish (عن s.th.); to cede (عن ل s.th. to); to leave, assign, transfer, make over (ل عن s.th. to); to lower o.s., stoop, condescend; to deign; to dismount, or line up, for battle │ ل العرش عن (تنزل) تنازل (‘arš) to abdicate in favor of; عن تنازل منصب (manṣib) to lay down an office, resign from office X to ask (ه s.o.) to step down; to call down, invoke (ھ s.th.); to make (ه s.o.) descend; to call upon s.o. (ه) to waive or forgo (عن s.th.); to force (ه the beleaguered) to surrender; to deduct, subtract (~ 0 s.th. from)
نزل nazl pl. نزول nuzūl, نزل nuzûl quarters, lodging; hotel, inn; -- (pl. نزول nuzūl) small tribal unit (of Bedouins); camp, camp site (of nomads, gypsies)
نزل nuzl pl. انزال anzāl food served to a guest
نزلة nazla putting up, stopping, stop, stay, arrival │ الحج نزلة al-ḥajj (eg.) festival of the return of the mahmal from Mecca (celebrated in the months of Safar or Rabia I)
نزلة nazla pl. nazalāt cold; catarrh │ شعبية نزلة (šu‘abīya) bronchial catarrh; نزلة صدرية (ṣadrīya) bronchitis; وافدة نزلة influenza (med.)
نزالة nizāla settlement, colony
نزول nuzūl descending, descent; dismounting. alighting; getting off or out (of a vehicle), disembarkation, debarkation; landing (of an airplane); arrival; putting up, stopping, stop, stopover, stay; cession, surrender, relinquishment, renunciation, resignation; falling, fall, drop; sinking; decline in prices, price slump │ على نزوال according to, in accordance with, in deference to; رغبته عند نزوال (ragbatihī) in compliance with his wish, in deference to his wish, at his request; طلبه عند نزوال (ṭalabihī) in compliance with his demand, in accordance with his request; المطر نزول n. al-maṭar rainfall
نزولي nuzūlī relative to decline (in prices and stocks), recessive, falling, sinking
نزيل nazīl pl. نزالء nuzalā’  guest; stranger; lodger, boarder; inmate; occupant, tenant
منزل manzil pl. منازل manāzil  stopping place, way station, camp site; apartment, fiat; house; lunar phase; see also under verb I │ االستراحة منزل resthouse; اللھو منازل واللعب m. al-lahw wa-l-la‘b amusement centers; المنزل اھل ahl al-m. household, family; المنزل صاحب landlord 957
منزلي manzilī domestic, house (adj.); private; household (adj.)
منزلة manzila degree, grade, rank; position, status, standing; dignity; see also under verb I and IV
تنزيل tanzīl sending down, bringing down; revelation, inspiration; reduction, diminution, lowering, lessening, decrease;
-- (pl. -āt) reduction (of prices); subtraction (arith.); deduction, discount;
 inlaying, inlay work │ الرتبة تنزيل t. ar- rutba or المقام تنزيل t. al-maqām, demotion, reduction in rank; نقدي تنزيل (naqdī) currency devaluation
نزال nizāl and منازلة munāzala lining up for battle; encounter, battle, fight
انزال inzāl bringing down, lowering; landing, debarkation, disembarkation; ejaculation of sperm; (pl. -āt) lease contract for life over a habous estate (Tun.) │ البحر الى انزال (baḥr) launching (of a ship); العمل الى انزال (‘amal) commissioning (of a ship)
تنازل tanāzul condescension; yielding, relenting; relinquishment, surrender, waiver, renunciation; transfer, assignment, cession; resignation, abdication; lining up for battle; struggle, fight, battle │ عدم التنازل ‘adam at-t. relentlessness, intransigence; التنازل عقد ‘aqd at-t. deed of cession
استنزال istinzāl deduction, discount
نازل nāzil living, resident
نازلة nāzila pl. نوازل nawāzil occurrence, event; mishap, accident, calamity, reverse, blow of fate; (tun.) (judicial) case, legal action │ مدنية نازلة (madanīya; tun.) civil action; نازلة اوراق (tun.) records of a lawsuit; النوازل قسم qism an-n. (tun.) division for contentious matters (of a court of justice); بنازلة قام (tun.) to take legal action, commence a lawsuit
منزول manzūl (eg.) a kind of narcotic
منزولي manzūlī (egs.) narcotic addict, dope addict
منزل munazzal inlaid (with ivory or a precious metal)
منزل munzal sent down (from heaven), revealed
متنازل mutanāzil abdicating, resigning; one who waives, cedes or asap a right, assignor
مستنزل mustanzil lessee on the basis of
inzāl (Tun.; see above)
نزنز to rock, dandle (a baby)
نزه nazuha u (نزاھة nazāha) to be far (عن from), be untouched. unblemished (عن by), be
free (عن from); to steer clear (عن of), keep away, refrain (عن from, esp., from a base or dishonorable action); -- naziha a to be respectable, honorable, decent II to deem or declare (ه s.o.) above s.th. (عن) V = nazuha; to be (far) above s.th. (عن); to go for a walk, take a walk, promenade, stroll about; to go out, to amuse o.s., enjoy o.s., have a good time
نزه nazih and نزيه nazīh pl. نزھاء nuzahā’ , نزاه nizāh pure, chaste, blameless, above reproach, of unblemished record, decent, honorable, respectable; honest, upright. righteous; scrupulous, correct; impartial
نزه nazah and نزاھة nazāha purity, blamelessness, honesty; uprightness, righteousness, probity, integrity, respectability; impartiality
نزھة nuzha pl. نزه nuzah, -āt walk, stroll, promenade; pleasure ride; outing, excursion, pleasure trip; recreation; amusement. entertainment, diversion, fun; excursion spot, picnic ground, sight- seeing spot, tourist attraction 958
manāzih  منازه pl. manzaha منزھة
recreation ground, park, garden
تنزيه tanzīh elimination of anthropomorphic elements from the conception of deity, deanthropomorphism (theol.)
تنزه tanazzuh pl. -āt walk, stroll, promenade
منزه munazzah infallible, free (عن from), (far) above s.th. (عن)
متنزه mutanazzih pl. -ūn walker, stroller, promenader; excursionist
متنزه mutanazzah promenade, walk, stroll, park
منتزه muntazah pl. -āt promenade, walk, stroll; recreation ground; park
 نزو) نزا) nazā u (نزو nazw, nuzūw, نزوان nazawān) to spring, jump, leap, bound; -- (نزوان nazawān) to escape (عن s.th.) │ نزا الى قلبه به (qalbuhū) to long, yearn for V to spring, jump, leap, bound; to be in a state of great commotion, be violently agitated, to heave, tremble (breast)
 نزوان nazawān sally, sortie; outburst, outbreak, eruption
نزوة nazwa pl. nazawāt (n. vic.) jump, leap, bound; sally, sortie; outburst, outbreak, eruption; surge, dare, dare-up; impetuosity, violence, vehemence; fit, attack, paroxysm; sudden mood, caprice, whim
 نازي and نازية look up alphabetically
نسأ nasa’a a (نسء nas’) to put off, postpone, delay, defer, procrastinate (ھ s.th.), -- (نساء nasā’) to allow (ه s.o.) time to pay, grant (ه s.o.) credit IV = I
نساء nasā’ long life, longevity
نساء nisā’ women, see نسو
نسيئة nasī’a credit, delay of payment,
nasī’atan on credit
منسأة minsa’a stick, staff
نسب nasaba u i (nasab, نسبة nisba) to relate, refer (ھ الى s.th. to), link, correlate, bring into relation (ھ الى s.th. with), to trace (الى ھ s.th. to s.o. as the originator, ه الى s.o.’s ancestry to); to ascribe, attribute, impute. lay (ل or ھ الى s.th. to s.o.), charge (ل or الى ھ with s.th. s.o.), accuse (ل or ھ الى of s.th. s.o.) III to stand in the same relationship (ه to s.o.); to correspond (ه ھ، to s.o., to s.th.), tally (ھ with s.th.), to suit, fit (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), go (ه ,ھ with), become, befit, behoove (ه s.o.); to harmonize, agree, be in keeping, be compatible, consistent (ھ with), to be similar (ه ھ، to s.o., to s.th.), resemble (ه ,ھ s.o., s.th.), be like s.o. or s.th. (ه ,ھ); to be in agreement, in conformity, in accordance. to tally, check (ھ with), be conformable (ھ to), to be of the same family (ه as), be or become related by marriage (ه to) VI to be related to one another, be relatives; to be alike, be akin, be mutually corresponding, be interrelated, be in agreement or conformity, be in the right proportion, be proportionate, match, fit together, go together; to be in agreement, in conformity, in accordance, to tally, check (مع with), be conformable (مع to) VIII to be related (الى to s.o.); to derive one’s origin (الى from), trace one’s ancestry (الى to), to derive one's name (الى from), be named (الى after), to belong, pertain, be
relative (الى to), to be associated (الى with), belong (الى to a clan, a party, a faction, etc.); to attach o.s. (الى to), associate, affiliate (الى with), to join (الى e.g., a political party), to be admitted (الى to a community), be affiliated (الى with, esp., as an extraordinary, not a full, member) X to trace back the ancestry (ه of s.o.), to deem 959 proper (ھ s.th.), approve (ھ of), sanction, condone (ھ s.th.)
نسب nasab pl. اناسب anāsib lineage, descent; origin. extraction, derivation, provenience; kinship, relationship, affinity, relationship by marriage │ سلسلة النسب silsilat an-n. family tree, pedigree, ancestral line, genealogy; األنساب علماء ‘ulamā’ al-a. genealogists
نسبة nisba ascription, attribution, imputation; kinship, relationship, affinity, relationship by marriage; connection, link; agreement, conformity, affinity; -- (pl. نسب nisab) relation, reference, bearing; ratio, rate; measure; proportion (math.); percentage; adjective denoting descent or origin, ending in الى نسبة │ ي (nisbatan) and (ل or) الى بالنسبة in respect to, with regard to, regarding, concerning, as to; as compared with, in comparison with; in relation to, with reference to; for, to; على نسبة in proportion to, in keeping
with, in accordance with, according to, corresponding to, commensurate with; نسبة الموت al-maut death rate; مئوية نسبة (mi’awīya) percentage
نسبي nisbī relative, comparative; percentual, percentile; proportional; نسبيا nisbīyan relatively │ نسبي وزن (wazn) specific gravity
نسبية nisbīya relativity
نساب nisāb genealogist
نسيب nasīb erotic introduction of the ancient Arabic kasida; -- (pl. , انسباء ansibā ) relative, kinsman (by mania~e);
brother-in-law; son-in-law; descending from a distinguished family, patrician, highborn, noble
انسب ansab  more adequate, more appropriate, more suitable, better qualified, fitter
 مناسبة mun<isaba suitability, suitableness, appropriateness, aptness, adequacy; fitness; correlation, analogy, correspondence; kinship, relationship. affinity; (pl. -āt) relation, reference, bearing, relevancy, pertinence; link; connection; occasion, opportunity │ في مناسبة or لمناسبة or بمناسبة on the occasion of; المناسبة بھذه in this connection; المناسبة لھذه due to these circumstances, for this reason, therefore, consequently, hence; في مناسبة كل whenever an opportunity arises, at every suitable occasion
تناسب tanāsub proportional relation, proportionality; proportionateness, balance, evenness; uniformity; regularity, symmetry; harmony; O proportion, mathematical equation; reciprocal relationship, interrelation; link, connection
│ التناسب عدم ‘adam at-t. disproportion
انتساب intisāb membership; affiliation │ باالنتساب طالب student by affiliation
منسوب mansūb related, brought into relation; attributed, ascribed, imputed (الى to s.o.); belonging, pertaining (الى to); relative (to), concerning, regarding (s.o. or s.th.); -- (pl. مناسيب manāsīb ) level, altitude; water level │ البحر منسوب  m. al- baḥr sea level; عالية مناسيب (‘āliya) high water levels, high waters
منسوبية mansūbīya nepotism
مناسب munāsib suitable, fitting, appropriate, proper, adequate; corresponding, commensurate; correspondent, congruous, analogous, conformable; proportional (math.)
متناسب mutanāsib proportionate, properly proportioned; proportional; mutually corresponding, analogous │ األجزاء متناسب even, regular, symmetrical
منتسب muntasib member, affiliate │ منتسب عضو (‘uḍw) associate (e.g., of an academy)
ناسوت nāsūt human nature, humanity 960
نسج nasaja u i (nasj) to weave (ھ s.th.); to knit
│ منواله على نسج (minwālihī) to imitate s.o., follow in s.o.’s tracks, walk in s.o.’s footsteps, act or proceed like s.o.; نسجه نسج (nasjahū) do. VIII to be woven
نسج nasj weaving; fabric, texture │ نسج الخيال al-kayāl fabling, flight of fancy
نساج nassāj weaver
نساجة nisāja art of weaving; weaver’s trade, textile industry
نسيج nasīj pl. نسوج nusūj, انسجة ansija, انساج ansāj texture, web, tissue (also anat.); woven fabric, textile │ خلوي نسيج (kalawī) cellular tissue (anat.); نسيج العنكبوت n. al-‘ankabūt spider’s web, cobweb; وحده نسيج n. waḥdihī unique in his (its) kind, singular, unparalleled; نسيج عصره n. ‘aṣrihī unique in his (its) time
منسج mansaj, mansij pl. مناسج manāsij
weaver’s shop, weaving mill
منسج minsaj loom
منسوج mansūj woven; woven fabric, textile; texture, tisane, web; pl. منسوجات woven goods, dry goods, textiles
نسخ nasaka a (nask) to delete (ھ s.th.); to abolish (ھ s.th.); to abrogate, invalidate (ھ s.th.); to repeal, revoke, withdraw (ھ s.th.); to cancel (ھ a contract); to replace ( ھ ب s.th. by), substitute (ھ ب for s.th. s.th. else); to transcribe, copy (ھ s.th.) III to supersede, supplant, replace (ھ s.th.), take the place (ھ of s.th.) V to be deleted, abolished, abrogated, invalidated VI to succeed, each other, follow successively; to pass from one body into another, transmigrate (soul) VIII to abolish, cancel, abrogate, invalidate (s.th.); to transcribe, copy (ھ s.th.) X to demand the abolition ( ھ of s.th.); to transcribe, copy (ھ s.th.)
نسخ nask abolition, abolishment, abrogation, cancellation, invalidation; copying, transcription │ النسخ قلم qalam an-n. Neskhi ductus (see below); النسخ لة آ duplicating machine, mimeograph; copying press
نسخي naskī Neskhi, the ordinary cursive Arabic script, the common calligraphic style
نسخة nuska pl. نسخ nusak transcript; copy (also, e.g., of a book, of a newspaper, etc.)
نساخ nasssāk pl. نساخة nassāka copyist, transcriber; scribe, scrivener, clerk
 تناسخ tanāsuk succession; transmigration of souls, metempsychosis
استنساخ istinsāk copying, transcription
ناسخ nāsik pl. نساخ nusssāk abrogative, abolishing; copyist, transcriber │ ناسخة آية Koranic verse which abrogates and supersedes another verse
منسوخ mansūk abrogated (Koranic verse)
نسر V to get torn; to break, snap X to become eagle-like
nusūra نسورة nusūr, نسور pl. nasr نسور
eagle; vulture
نسارية nusārīya eagle
ناسور nāsūr pl. نواسر nawāsir  fistula, tumor
منسر minsar, mansir, pl. مناسر manāsir  beak (of predatory birds); band, gang, group, troop
نسطوري nusṭūrī pl. نساطرة nasāṭira Nestorian
نسغ nusg sap (of a plant)
نسف nasafa i (nasf) to pulverize, atomize, spray (ھ s.th.); to carry away and scatter (wind -- the dust); to blow up, blast (ھ s.th.); O to torpedo (ھ a ship) IV to 961 scatter (esp., wind -- the dust) VIII to raze (ھ s.th.); to blow up, blast (ھ s.th.)
نسف nasf blowing up, blasting; destruction, demolition
نساف nussāf pl. نساسيف nasāsīf a variety of swallow; rhinoceros hornbill (zool.)
نسافة nusāfa chaff
نسافة nassāfa pl. -āt torpedo boat
مناسف pl. minsafa منسفة and minsaf منسف
manāsif  winnow
ناسف nāsif and ناسفة nāsifa explosive, dynamite
نسق nasaqa u (nasq) and II to string (ھ pearls); to put in proper order, arrange nicely, range, array, order, marshal, dispose (ھ s.th.); to set up, line up (ھ s.th.) V to be well-ordered, be in proper order, be nicely arranged; to be arranged, arrayed, disposed VI do.; to be geared to each
other, be well-coordinated (weapons) VIII
= V
نسق nask ordering, successive arrangement, lining up, alignment
نسق nasaq order, array, layout, arrangement, disposition; connection, succession, sequence; manner, mode, system, method; symmetry; نسقا nasaqan in regular order, in rows │ نسق على in the manner of; واحد نسق على in the same manner, equally, evenly, uniformly; حروف النسق conjunctions (gram.)
نسيق nasīq well-ordered, well-arranged, regular, even, uniform
تنسيق tansīq ordering, arraying; setting up, drawing up; distribution, disposition; arrangement; systematic arrangement; planned economy │ داخلي تنسيق (dākilī) interior decoration
تنسق tanassuk uniformity
تناسق tanāsuk order; symmetry; harmony
منسق munasaq well-ordered, well- arranged; staggered (troop formation); harmonious
متناسق mutanāsiq well-ordered, well- arranged, regular, symmetrical
نسك nasaka u and nasuka u (نساكة nasāka) to lead a devout life; to live the life of an ascetic V do.; to be pious, devout, otherworldly
نسك nask, nusk, nusuk piety, devoutness; asceticism; reclusion
نسكي nusukī ascetic (adj.)
نسك nusuk sacrifice; ceremonies (of the pilgrimage)
ناسك nāsik pl. نساك nussāk hermit, recluse, penitent; ascetic; pious man, devotee
منسك mansik pl. مناسك manāsik  hermitage, cell of an ascetic; place of sacrifice; ceremony, ritual, esp., during the pilgrimage
نسل nasala u (nasl) to beget, procreate, sire, father (ه children); -- u to pluck out (ھ s.th.); to pluck (ھ s.th.); to ravel out, unravel, untwist, fray (ھ s.th.); to molt; (
 نسول nusūl) to fall out (hair, feathers) II to separate into fibers, to shred, ravel (ھ rags); to unravel, undo (ھ a woven or knitted fabric) IV to beget, procreate, sire, father (ه children); to molt; to fall out (hair, feathers) VI to propagate, breed, reproduce, multiply; to beget offspring; to descend, be descended (من from)
نسل nasl pl. انسال ansāl progeny, offspring, issue, descendants │ النسل تقليل birth control; والنسل الحرث (ḥart) the civilization of mankind
نسالة nusāla fibrous waste, thrums; ravelings; lint
O نسالة nassāla raveling machine, willow 962
نسولة nasūla brood animal
O نسيلة nasīla offprint, reprint انسال insāl procreation, generation تناسل tanāsul sexual propagation,
procreation, generation, reproduction │ التناسل اعضاء sexual organs, genitals; ضعف التناسل ḍu‘f at-t. sexual impotence
تناسلي tanāsulī procreative, propagative; genital, sexual │ تناسلي مرض (maraḍ) venereal disease
تناسليات tanāsulīyāt sexual organs
نسم nasama i (nasm, نسمان nasamān) to blow gently II to commence, start, begin
(في s.th.) V to blow; to breathe; to inhale (ھ s.th.); to-exhale (ب a fragrant smell), smell pleasantly, be redolent (ب of), be fragrant (ب with) │ الخبر تنسم (kabara) to nose around for news, sniff out the news
نسم nasam pl. انسام ansām breath; breath of life
نسمة nasama pl. -āt breath; whiff, waft; breeze; O aura; breathing, living creature; person, soul (e.g., in a census, as a numerative in statistics)
نسيم nasīm pl. نسام nisām, نسائم nasā’im  breath of air, fresh air; wind, breeze │ شم النسيم šamm an-n. Egyptian popular holiday celebrated on the Monday following Greek-Coptio Easter
منسم mansim pl. مناسم manāsim  foot sole, padded foot (of animals)
متنسم mutanassim (with foll. genit.) place where s.th. blows, is exhaled, emanates, or exudes
نسانس nanās, nisnās pl. نسانس nasānis  a fabulous creature of the woods, having one leg and one arm; (eg.) monkey
women nisā’ نساء and niswān نسوان niswa, نسوة )امرأة of (pl.
نسوي nisawī and نسائي nisā’ī female, feminine, womanly, women’s; نسائيات women’s affairs, things belonging to a woman’s world
نسائية nisā’īya feminist movement
نسي nasiya a (nasy, نسيان nisyān) to forget (ھ s.th.) │ انس ال انس ما mā ansa lā ansā (lit.: whatever I may forget, I shall not forget, i.e.) I shall never forget; sometimes also: انسى ال انس ما (ansā) and انسى فال انس ان (in) I shall never forget IV to make (ه s.o.) forget (ھ s.th.) VI to pretend to have forgotten (ھ s.th.); to forget, neglect, omit (ھ s.th.), become oblivious (ھ of)
نسي nasy oblivion, forgetfulness; s.th. one hal forgotten │ منسيا نسيا اصبح  aṣbaḥa nasyan mansīyas to be completely forgotten, fall into utter oblivion
nisyān  نسيان and nassā’ نساء nasīy, نسي
forgetful, oblivious
نسيان nisyān oblivion, forgetfulness
منسي mansīy forgotten; pl. منسيات (as opposed to محفوظات) things once memorized and now forgotten
نش našša i (našš, نشيش nasīš) to sizzle, simmer, bubble, boil up; to hiss; -- to drive away flies
نشاش ورق waraq naššāš blotting paper
منشة minašša fly whisk
نشأ naša’a a and نشؤ našū’a u (نشء naš’, نشوء nušū’, نشأة naš’a) to rise, rise aloft, emerge, appear, loom up; to come into being, come into existence, originate, form, arise, come about, crop up; to proceed, spring (من or عن from), grow out (من or عن of); to follow, ensue, result, derive (من or عن from); to grow, grow up;
 to develop, evolve │ ذاتيا نشوءا نشأ (dātīyan) to start by iteslf, arise spontaneously, come about automatically 963 II to cause to grow; to bring up, raise (ھ a child) IV to cause (ھ s.th.) to rise; to create, bring into being (ھ s.th., of God); to bring forth, produce, generate, engender (ھ s.th.), give rise (ھ to s.th.); to make, manufacture, fabricate (ھ s.th.); to build, construct (ھ s.th.); to call into existence, originate, start, found, establish, organize. institute ( ھ s.th.); to set up, erect (ھ s.th.); to install (ھ s.th.); to compose, draw up (ھ a piece of writing), write (ھ a book); to bring up, raise, rear (ه a child); to begin, start, commence, initiate (ھ s.th.) V to grow, develop, spread, gain ground X to search, ask, look (ھ for news)
نشء naš’ youth; new generation │ النشء الجديد the young generation
نشأة naš’a growing up, upgrowth, growth; early life. youth; rise, birth, formation, genesis; origin; youth, young generation; culture, refinement; upbringing. background (of a person) │ مستأنفة نشأة (musta’nafa) rebirth, renaissance
نشوء nusii’ growing, growth, development, evolution │ O النشوء <<<< والترقي madhab an-n. wa-t-taraqqī theory of evolution, evolutionism
O النشوئيون an-nušū’īyūn the evolutionists
منشأ manša’ place of origin or up- growth; birth place, home town, home; fatherland, homeland, native country; origin, rise, birth, formation, genesis; source, springhead, fountainhead; beginning, start, onset
تنشيء tanšī’ upbringing, education تنشئة tanši’a upbringing, education إنشاء inšā’ creation; origination;
bringing about; setting up. Establishment, organization, institution; formation; making, manufacture, production; erection; building, construction; founding, foundation; installation; composition, compilation, writing; letter writing; style, art of composition; essay, treatise │ عسكرية انشاءات (‘askarīya) military
installations; اإلنشاء اعادة i’ādat al-i.
reconstruction
إنشائي inšā’ī creative; constructive; relating to composition or style; stylistic; editing, editorial │ إنشائي برنامج (barnāmaj) production program; انشائية قطعة (qiṭ‘a) exercise in composition; انشائي موضوع theme, composition
ناشئ nāši’ growing, growing up; arising, originating, proceeding, emanating, springing, resulting (or from); beginner; (in sports) junior; youngster, youth
ناشئة nāši’a youth, rising generation
منشئ munši’ creating; creative; creator; organizer, promoter, founder; author, writer
منشأة munša’a pl. -āt creation, product, work, OpUs; foundation, establishment; installation; institution, institute; pl. installations (e.g., industrial, military)
 نشب našiba a (našb, نشبة nušba, نشوب nušūb) to be fixed, be attached, cling, stick, adhere (في to); to attend (ب s.th.), be incident (ب to); to get involved (في in), meddle (في with); to break out (war) │ ما نشب or ينشب لم not to hesitate II and IV to stick on, paste on, attach, fix, insert (ھ s.th.)
نشب našb property, possession
نشوب nušūb clinging, adherence (في to); outbreak
نشاب naššāb arrow maker; archer, bowman
نشاشيب pl. )ة un. n. (coll.; nuššāb نشاب
našāšīb  arrows
منتشب muntašib fierce, violent (battle)
  منشوبية look up alphabetically 964
نشج našaja i (نشيج našīj) to sob
نشد našada u (našd, نشدة našda, نشدان nišdān) to seek (ھ s.th.), look, search (ھ for); to adjure, implore (ه ه s.o. by, e.g., ﷲ allaha by God) III to adjure, implore (ه يفعل ان or ه ھ s.o. to do s.th., ه ه s.o. by, e.g., ﷲ allāha by God) IV to seek (ھ s.th.), look, search (ھ for); to sing (ھ s.th.); to recite (
 ه ھ to s.o. verses) VI to recite verses to each other X to ask (ه s.o.) to recite verses
نشائد pl. unšūda انشودة and našīd نشيد song; anāšīd  اناشيد anšād, انشاد našā’id , نشيد األنشاد or نشيد األناشد │ anthem hymn, Songs; of Song the Solomon, of Song the نشيد International; the (umamī) النشيد األممي نشيد عسكري song; rallying (ḥamāsī) حماسي song; marching song, soldier’s (‘askarī) نشيد or (qaumī) نشيد قومي march; military نشيد ليلي anthem; national (waṭanī) وطني royal (malakī) نشيد ملكي serenade; (lailī) anthem
مناشدة munāšada urgent request, earnest appeal, adjuration
انشاد inšād recitation, recital
منشود manšūd sought, aspired, desired, pursued (aim, objective)
منشد munšid singer
نشادر nušādir and نوشادر nūšādir ammonia
نشر našara u (našr) to spread out (ھ s.th.); to unfold, open (ھ s.th.); to unroll (ھ s.th.); to hoist (ھ a flag); -- u i to spread, diffuse, emit (ھ e.g., a scent); to announce publicly, publicize (ھ s.th.); to publish (ھ a book, an advertisement, etc.); to propagate, spread (ھ s.th.); -- u (našr, نشور nušūr) to resurrect from the dead (ه s.o.);
-- to saw apart (ھ s.th.) II to spread out, unfold (ھ s.th.) IV to resurrect from the dead (ه s.o.) V to be spread out, be unfolded; to spread VIII to be spread out, be unfolded; to spread (news, a disease, etc.); to spread out, extend, expand; to be propagated, be conveyed (waves); to be diffused, be scattered, be dispersed, be thrown into disorder; O to fan out, extend (mil.)
نشر našr unfolding; spreading, diffusion; propagation; promulgation; publication; notification, announcement; resurrection │ الدعوة نشر n. ad-da‘wa propaganda; .r;J1 r.J! lIa..m an·n. Day of Resurrection; النشر دار publishing house
نشرة našra pl. našarāt (public) notice, proclamation; publication; report, account; announcement; advertisement; circular; leaflet, pamphlet, handbill; periodical; order, ordinance, decree, edict │ نشرة
األخبار or اخبارية نشرة (ikbārīya) newscast, news (radio); دورية نشرة (daurīya) periodical publication; اسبوعية نشرة (usbū‘īya) weekly publication, weekly paper; newsreel; جوية نشرات (jawwīya) weather report (radio); باألسعار خاصة نشر (kāṣṣa) prospectus, price list; يومية نشرة (rasmīya) official publication, bulletin; شھرية نشرة (šahrīya) monthly publication; O يومية نشرة (yaumīya) order of the day (mil.)
نشار naššār sawyer
نشارة nišāra (activity of) sawing
نشارة nušāra sawdust
يوم النشور │ resurrection nušūr نشور
yaum an-n. Day of Resurrection
saw manāšīr  مناشير pl. minšār منشار
انتشار intišār spreading, spread, diffusion, diffusiveness
ناشر nāšir publisher
منشور manšūr spread abroad. propagated, made public, published; sawn (apart); -- (pl. -āt, مناشير manāšīr ) leaflet, pamphlet, handbill; circular; prospectus; proclamation; order, ordinance, decree, edict; prism (math.) 965
منشوري look up alphabetically
منتشر muntašir spreading, spread out; widespread, current, rife; prevailing, prevalent, predominant
نشز našaza u i (našz) to be elevated, be located high above; to rise; -- (نشوز nušūz) to be recalcitrant, disobedient (ب من، على، toward her husband; said of a woman); to treat (a wife) brutally (said of a man) IV to restore to life, revive, reanimate (ھ s.th.)
نشز našaz pl. انشاز anšāz elevated place, high ground
نشاز našāz dissonance, discord
نشوز nušūz animosity, hostility; antipathy; dissonance, discord; (īsl. Law) violation of marital duties on the part of either husband or wife, specif., recalcitrance of the woman toward her husband, and brutal treatment of the wife by the husband
 ناشز nāšiz protruding, elevated, raised; jarring, dissonant, discordant; recalcitrant
nawāšiz  نواشز pl. nāšiza ناشزة
recalcitrant woman, shrew, termagant
نشط našiṭa a (نشاط našāṭ) to be lively, animated, brisk, sprightly, vivacious, spirited, active, eager, keen, zealous, brave, cheerful, gay; to display vim and energy (في in some work), be energetic and active, work energetically and actively (الى for, toward); to be in the mood (ل for), feel like doing s.th. (ل); to be glad, enthusiastic (ل about); to apply
o.s. eagerly, attend actively (ل to some activity), embark briskly (ل upon s.th.) │ عقاله من نشط (‘iqālihī) to be freed from one’s shackles, be unfettered, be unshackled; -- našafa u (našf) to tie a knot
(ھ in a rope), knot (. a rope) II and IV to incite, spur on, enliven, stimulate, activate, excite (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to strengthen, invigorate, animate, inspirit, energize (ه s.o.), impart vim and energy (ه to s.o.), encourage, embolden (ه s.o., الى to do s.th.); to knot, tie up (ھ s.th.) V to be lively, animated, brisk, sprightly, vivacious, spirited, active, eager, keen, zealous, brave, cheerful, gay; to display vim and energy (في in some work), be energetic and active, work energetically and actively (الى for, toward); to be in the mood (ل for), feel like doing s.th. (ل)
نشط našiṭ lively, animated, spirited, brisk, sprightly, vivacious, agile, nimble; stirring, bustling, busy, enterprising, energetic, active
نشطة našṭa energy; eagerness, ardor, zeal
نشاط našāṭ briskness, sprightliness, liveliness, animation, vivacity; agility, alacrity, eagerness, ardor, zeal, energy, vim, activeness; activity; lively activity, action, operation; strength, power (physical and mental); vigor, vital energy, vitality │ جوي نشاط (jawwī) aerial activity; اشعاعي نشاط (iš‘ā‘ī) radioactivity; نشاط ذو اشعاعي radioactive; اشعاعي نشاط ذات مواد (mawād ) radioactive substances, radioactive matter; نشاط صاحب active; عديم النشاط inactive, dull, listless (stock market)
نشيط našīṭ pl. نشاط nišāṭ brisk, lively, spirited, animated, cheerful, gay; stirring, bustling, busy, active, energetic; glad, happy, enthusiastic (ل about), actively devoted (ل to) │ النشيط الجنس (jins) the stronger sex
انشوطة unšūṭa pl. اناشيط anāšīṭ  knot, slipknot, bow, noose
منشط manšaṭ pleasant thing
تنشيط tanšīṭ encouragement, incitement; stimulation; enlivening, animation, activation 966
ناشط nāšiṭ brisk, lively, spirited, animated, cheerful, gay; stirring, bustling, busy, active, energetic
منشط munšiṭ spur, incentive, impetus, stimulus
نشع naša‘a a (naš‘) to tear out, tear off (ھ s.th.) VIII do.
نشع naš‘ leakage water, seepage
منشع munašša‘ sodden, soggy, soaked, drenched, soaking wet
نشف našafa u (našf) to suck up, absorb (ھ s.th.); -- nasifa a to dry, dry up, dry out, become dry II to dry, make dry (ھ s.th.); to wipe (dry), rub dry (ھ s.th.) │ ريقه نشف (rīqahū) to exert o.s., toil hard; to pester, molest s.o. V = nasifa; to wipe o.s. dry; to be wiped dry, be dried
نشف našaf desiccation, dryfless
نشاف naššāf blotting paper
نشافة naššāfa sheet of blotting paper, blotting pad; blotter; towel
منشفة minšafa pl. مناشف manāšif towel; cleaning rag; napkin
تنشيف tanšīfdrying
ناشف nāšif desiccated, dried up, dry; hard, stiff, tough
نشق našiqa a (našq and našaq) to smell, sniff, inhale (ھ sth.); to suff up the nosrils(ھ s.th.) II and IV to give (ه ھ s.o. s.th.) to smell, make (ه s.o.) inhale (ھ s.th.) V and VIII to inhale, breathe in; to snuff up the nostrils (ھ s.th.) │ الھواء انتشق (hawā’a) to get some fresh air X = I; to nose around ( ھ for), sniff out (ھ s.th.)
 استنشاق and tanaššuq تنشق našq, نشق
istinšāq inhaling, inhalation نشوق našūq, nušūq snuff تنشيقة tanšīqa pinch of snuff
نشل našala u (naš) to take away, snatch away, steal, pilfer (ھ s.th.); to extricate (from dangers, difficulties, etc.), liberate, deliver, save (ه s.o.) VIII to extricate; to raise, raise aloft; to gather up, pick up (shipwrecked persons, etc.), save, rescue ( ه s.o.)
نشل našl pickpocketing, pickpocketry
نشال naššāl pickpocket
نشان nišān and نيشان nīšān pl. نياشين nayāšīn  sign; mark; aim, goal; target; decoration, medal. order; ('1/.) bridal attire
naānjī نشانجي and našanjī نشنجي
marksman, good shot, sharpshooter
نشنكاه nišankāh sight (of a gun)
نشنش našnaša to be nimble, swift, brisk, adroit, dexterous, agile, active; to boil up, sizzle, simmer, bubble II tanašnaša to be nimble and dexterous; to revive, recover, pick up
(نشو and نشي (نشي našiya a (نشوة našwa, nušwa, nišwa) to be or become intoxicated, be or become drunk II to starch (ھ clothes, linen) VIII to become intoxicated X to smell (ھ a scent), to inhale (ھ a breeze)
نشوة našwa fragrance, aroma, scent, perfume; intoxication, drunkenness; frenzy, delirium │ الطرب نشوة n. aṭ-ṭarab rapture, elation, exultation, enthusiasm, ecstasy
نشا našan scent, perfume; starch, cornstarch
نشاء našā’ starch, cornstarch
نشوي našawī starchy; pl. نشويات starchy foodstuffs
نشوان našawān , f. نشوى našwā, pl. نشاوى našāwā intoxicated, drunk; enraptured, elated, exultant, flushed
انتشاء intišā’ intoxication 967
نص naṣṣa u (naṣṣ) to fix, lay down, appoint, stipulate (على s.th.), provide (على for), specify, determine (على or عن s.th.), define (على s.th.); to fix or determine the text (ھ
of s.th.), draw up, compose (ھ a letter); to arrange, stack, pile up in layers (ھ s.th.); to set up, line up (ھ s.th.)
نص pl. نصوص text; wording, version; passage, word, phrase, sentence, clause; expression, manner of expression, language, phraseology, style; provision, term, stipulation, condition; arrangement; manifestation, evidence │ بنصه verbatim, وفصه بنصه bi-n. wa-faṣṣihī in the very words, ipsissimis verbis, literally, precicely; وروحا نصا naṣṣan wa-rūḥan in letter and spirit
نصة nuṣṣa pl. نصص nuṣaṣ, forelock
منصة minṣa pl. -āt, مناص manāṣṣ  raised platform, dais, tribune, podium; bridal throne; easel │ الحكم منصة m. al-ḥukm position of power; الخطابة منصة rostrum
تنصيص tanṣīṣ quotation │ عالمات التنصيص ‘alāmāt at-t. quotation marks
عليه منصوص manṣūṣ ‘alaihi fixed, appointed, stipulated, provided for, specified; determined; laid down in writing
نصب naṣaba u (naṣb) to raise, rear, erect, set up, put up (ھ s.th.); to prepare, get ready, fit up (ھ s.th.); to pitch (ھ a tent); to plant, raise (ھ a standard, a flagstaff), hoist (ھ a flag); to plant (ھ a tree); O to level, aim (ھ a cannon); to appoint to an office, install in an official position; to show, manifest, display (ل toward s.o., ھ evil, enmity); to direct, aim (ھ s.th., e.g., criticism, على against or at s.o.); (eg.) to cheat, swindle, dupe, gull, deceive (على s.o.); (gram.) to pronounce (a final consonant) with the vowel a; to put (a noun) in the accusative, put (a verb) in the subjunctive │ الحرب له نصب (ḥarba) to declare war on s.o.; شركا له نصب (šarakan) or فخا له نصب (fakkan) to set a trap for s.o.; كمينا له نصب (kamīnan) to prepare an ambush for s.o.; مكيدة نصب (makīdatan) to devise a clever plan, hatch a plot; -- naṣaba u (naṣb) to distress, trouble, fatigue, wear out, exhaust (disease or sorrow; ه s.o.); to jade (ه s.o.) │ انفسھم نصبوا ل (anfusahum) they made every effort in order to ..., they struggled hard to ...; -- naṣiba a (naṣab) to be tired, fatigued, jaded, worn out, exhausted; to exert o.s. to
 the utmost (في in) II to set up, set upright, rear, raise, lift up (ھ s.th.); to install (ه ه
s.o. as), appoint (ه ه s.o. to an office) │ نص اذنيه ب (udnaihi) to prick up one’s ears III to be hostile (ه to s.o.), fight, combat, oppose (ه s.o.), display enmity │ ناصبه الحرب (ḥarba) to declare war on s.o.; ناصبه الشر (šarra) to show o.s. openly hostile to s.o., open hostilities against s.o.; ناصب العداء (‘adā’a) to declare o.s. the enemy of
s.o. IV to tire, fatigue, wear out, exhaust (ه s.o.); to fix a share or allotment (ه for s.o.) VIII to rise up, straighten up, draw o.s. up; to plant o.s.; to rise; to get up, stand up, get on one’s feet; to stand upright, be in a vertical position; to be set up, be raised; to be appointed (ل to an office), hold an office (ل); (gram.) to be pronounced with a (final consonant), be in naṣb (accusative or subjunctive) │ للحكم انتصب (li-l-ḥukm) to sit in judgment
نصب setting up, putting up, placing; erection; planting, raising (e.g., of a flagstaff); appointment, installation, investiture; pronunciation of a final consonant with a; the putting a noun in the accusative, or a verb in the subjunctive (gram.); disease, illness; (eg.) swindle, trickery, skulduggery, deception, fraud
نصب naṣb pl. انصاب anṣāb s.th. planted in the ground, set up, or erected; plants (coll.) 968
نصب nuṣb, nuṣub pl. انصاب anṣāb statue; idol, graven image; monument │ تذكاري نصب (tadkārī) monument, cenotaph
نصب nuṣba (prep.) in front of, opposite, facing │ عيني نصب (‘ainayya) before my eyes; عينيه نصب ھ (وضع) جعل (‘ainaihi) to direct one’s attention to ..., have ... in view
نصب naṣab exertion, strain, hardship, fatigue; (pl. انصاب anṣāb) flag planted in the ground
نصبة naṣba pl. -āt plant
نصبة nuṣba post; pale, stake, pier, buttress, pillar; signpost, guidepost
نصاب niṣāb origin, beginning; (Isl.
Law) minimum amount of property liable to payment of the zakāh tax; minimum number or amount; quorum; (pl. -āt, نصب nuṣub) sword hilt, knife handle, saber
guard │ نصابه في in its proper place, in good order, perfectly all right; األمور استقرت نصابھا في (istaqarrat) things were straightened out, returned to normal; وضع نصابه في الحق (ḥaqqa) to restore justice; رد نصابه الى امرا (وضع اعاد،) (radda, a‘āda amran) to straighten s.th. out, set a matter right; نصابه الى الھدوء عاد (hudū’u) peace has been restored; للنصاب اتماما (itmāman) so as to complete the number, in order to round off the amount
نصاب naṣṣāb fraud, cheat, sharper, swindler, impostor; deceitful, fraudulent
نصيب naṣīb pl. نصب nuṣub, انصباء anṣibā’ , انصبة anṣiba share, participation (في in); share of profits, dividend; luck, chance; fate, lot │ نصيبه من كان to fall to s.o.’s share or lot; ان نصيبه من كان to be so fortunate as to ..., have the good fortune to
have to (ikfāqu) كان نصيبه من ذلك اإلخفاق ...; ھو على blank; a draw s.th., in luck bad
من وافر نصيب (wāfirin) to have an ample share in ...
نصيب يا yā-naṣīb lottery
منصب manṣib pl. مناصب manāṣib  place where s.th. is planted, set up, or erected; office, dignity, rank, position, poet │ ارباب الممناصب or المناصب اصحاب high dignitaries
manāṣib  مناصب pl. minṣab منصب
kitchen range, cookstove
تنصيب tanṣīb appointment, nomination; installation, induction (in an official position)
انتصاب intiṣāb raising, rearing, righting; setting up, putting up; erection
ناصب nāṣib tiring, wearisome, exhausting; -- (pl. نواصب nawāṣib ) word governing the subjunctive (gram.)
منصوب manṣūb erected; set-up, raised; planted in the ground; fixed, fastened, attached; installed in office; leveled, aimed (cannon; على at); (pl. -āt) word in the accusative or subjunctive
منتصب muntaṣib set upright, set-up, raised, planted in the ground; erected; upright, erect, straight, vertical, perpendicular
 نصت naṣata i (naṣt) and IV to listen, hearken, give ear (الى or ل to s.o., ل to s.th.) V to try to hear; to eavesdrop, listen secretly
منتصت mutanaṣṣit eavesdropper
نصح naṣaḥa a (naṣḥ, nuṣḥ, نصاحة naṣāḥa, نصيحة naṣīḥa) to give (ل ه، s.o.) sincere advice, advise, counsel (ل ه، s.o., ب to do s.th.), admonish. exhort; -- a (naṣḥ, نصوح nuṣūḥ) to be sincere; to mean well (ل with s.o.), wish s.o. (ل) well, be well-disposed, show good will (ل toward s.o.); to act in good faith (ل toward s.o.) III to give (ه s.o.) sincere advice; to be sincere in one’s intentions (ه toward s.o.) VI to be loyal and sincere toward each other VIII to take good advice, follow an advice X to 969 ask (ه s.o.) for advice, be advised (ه by s.o.), consult (ه s.o.)
نصح naṣḥ, nuṣḥ good advice; counseling, counsel; guidance
نصيح naṣīḥ sincere; faithful adviser
نصيحة naṣīḥa pl. نصائح naṣā’iḥ  sincere advice; friendly admonition, friendly reminder │ النصيحة بذل to give a word of advice
نصوح naṣūḥ sincere, true, faithful, loyal
استنصاح istinṣāḥ consultation
ناصح nāṣiḥ pl. نصاح nuṣṣāḥ, نصح nuṣṣah sincere; good counselor, sincere adviser
نصر naṣara u (naṣr, نصور nuṣūr) to help, aid, assist (ه على s.o. against); to render victorious, let triumph (ه على s.o. over; of God); to deliver (ه من s.o. from), keep, protect, save II to Christianize, convert to Christianity (ه s.o.) III to help, aid, assist, support, defend, protect (ه s.o.) V to try to help, seek to support (ل s.o.), stand up for
s.o. (ل); to become a Christian VI to render mutual assistance, help each other VIII to come to s.o.’s (ل) aid, be on s.o.’s ( ل) side, side with s.o. (ل); to be victorious; to gain a victory, to triumph (على over); to take revenge (من on) X to ask (ه s.o.) for assistance
نصر naṣr help, aid, assistance, support, backing; victory; triumph
نصرة nuṣra help, aid, assistance, support, backing
naṣārā نصارى pl. naṣrānī نصراني
Christian
نصرانية naṣrānīya Christianity
نصير naṣīr pl. نصراء nuṣarā’  helper; supporter, defender, protector; ally, canfederate; adherent, follower, partisan; furtherer, promoter, patron
النصيرية an-nuṣairīya the Ansarie, a gnostic sect in Syria
ناصور naṣūr pl. نواصير nawāṣīr  fistula
منصر manṣar pl. مناصر manāṣir  (eg.) band of robbers
تنصير tanṣīr Christianization; baptism
مناصرة munāṣara assistance, help, aid, support, backing, furtherance, promotion, patronage
انتصار intiṣār (pl. -āt) victory, triumph; revenge
نصار anṣār, انصار -ūn, pl. nāṣir ناصر
nuṣṣār helper; protector; granting victory
s.o. help to اخذ بناصره │
انصار anṣār (pl.) adherents, followers, partisans, sponsors, patrons, friends; األنصار the Medinan followers of Mohammed who granted him refuge after the Hegira
الناصرة an-nāṣira Nazareth
ناصري nāṣirī of Nazareth; Nazarene
منصور manṣūr supported, aided (by God); victorious, triumphant; victor; المنصورة El Mansûra (city in N Egypt)
مناصر munāṣir helper, supporter, defender, protector
منتصر muntaṣir victorious, triumphant
نصع naṣa‘a a (نصوع nuṣū‘) to be clear, pure; to be plain, evident, obvious, manifest, patent; to recognize (ب s.th., esp., a claim or title) IV to recognize. acknowledge (ب s.th.)
نصوع nuṣū‘ whiteness; brightness (of a color)
نصيع naṣī‘ pure, clear; plain, evident, obvious, ostensible, manifest, patent
 نصاعة naṣā‘a purity; clearness, clarity (also. e.g., of argumentation, of expression) 970
ناصع nāṣi‘ pure, clear; plain, evident, obvious, ostensible, manifest, patent; white │ البياض ناصع n. al-bayāḍ snowwhite; ناصع حق (ḥaqq) plain truth; لھم ناصعة جباه approx.: they have a clean slate, their skirts are clean
نصف naṣafa u i (naṣf) to reach its midst (day), become noon II to divide in the middle, bisect, halve (ھ s.th.) III to share (ه with s.o.) half of s.th. (ھ), go halves (ه ھ with
s.o. in), share equally (ه ھ with s.o. s.th.) IV to be just; to treat with justice (ه s.o.), be just (ه with s.o.); to see that justice is done (ه to s.o.), see that s.o. (ه) gets his right; to treat without discrimination (ه s.o.); to establish s.o.’s (ه) right (من in the face of a rival or oppressor); to serve (ه s.o.) V to submit, subordinate o.s. (ه to s.o.), serve (ه s.o.); to demand justice VIII to reach its midst, be in the middle, be midway, be half over (day, night, month, lifetime); to appeal for justice (من to), demand justice (من from); to do justice (ل to s.o.); to take vengeance, revenge o.s. ( من on) X to demand justice
نصف niṣf, pl. انصاف anṣāf half, moiety; middle │ الدائرة نصف semicircle; نصف شھري šahrī semimonthly; العذارى انصاف a. al-‘adārā demi-vierges; القرد نصف n. al- qird lemur; القطر نصف n. al-quṭr radius; الليل نصف n. al-lail midnight; النھار نصف n. an-nahār midday, noon; السنوي نصف القسط al-qisṭ niṣf as-sanawī the semiannual installment
نصف niṣf (uninfl.) medium, middling; of medium size or quality; middle-aged
نصفي niṣfī half-, semi-, hemi-, demi- │ نصفي تمثال (timtāl) bust; نصفي شلل (šalal) hemiplegia; نصفي عمى (‘aman) hemianopia
نصف naṣaf and نصفة naṣafa justice
نصيف naṣīf veil
تنصيف tanṣīf halving, bisection
مناصفة munāṣafatan half of it (of them), by halves, half and half, by equal shares, fifty-fifty
انصاف inṣāf justice, equity, fairness; just treatment
naṣaf, نصف nuṣṣāf, نصاف pl. nāṣif ناصف
نصفة naṣafa servant
منصف munaṣṣif halving, bisecting, dividing into two equal parts
منصف munṣif a righteous, just man; equitable, fair, just
في منتصف │ middle muntaṣaf منتصف منتصف الساعة midway; halfway, الطريق m. منتصف الليل nine; past half ,العاشرة ٠٣:٩ an-nahār m. منتصف النھار midnight; al-lail noon midday,
نصل naṣala a u (نصول nuṣūl) to fall out, fall off, fall to the ground, drop; to fade (color); to get rid (من of), free o.s. (من from) V to free o.s. (من from), rid o.s. (من of); to renounce, disavow, shirk (من s.th.), withdraw (من from); to wash one’s hands of s.th. (من), vindicate o.s. clear o.s., justify o.s. │ التبعة من تنصل (tabi‘a) or تنصل المسؤولية من (mas’ūlīya) to refuse to take the responsibility, evade or shirk the responsibility
نصل naṣl (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. نصال niṣāl, انصل anṣul, نصول nuṣūl arrowhead, spearhead; blade or a knife or sword; O spread or surface of a leaf (bot.)
ناصل nāṣil falling, dropping; faded
نصمة naṣama icon, idol, graven image
ناصية nāṣiya pl. نواص nawāṣin forelock; fore part of the head; (street) corner │ اخذ بناصيته to seize, take by the forelock, tackle properly (ھ s.th.); ناصيته ملك to be or become muter of s.th., have or get s.th, under control. muter or control s.th.; امتلك نواصيه (imtalaka) do.; بناصيته معقودة اآلمال كل all hopes are pinned on him; الناصية حجر ḥajar an-n. cornerstone, quoin 971
نض naḍḍa i (naḍḍ, نضيض naḍīḍ) to ripple, drip, percolate, ooze, leak, dribble, trickle II to move, shake (ھ s.th.)
نض naḍḍ cash, hard money, specie, coin; نضا naḍḍsn in (hard) cash
ناض مال māl nāḍḍ cash, hard money, specie, coin
نضب naḍaba u (نضوب nuḍūb) to seep away in the ground, be absorbed by the ground; to
 dry up, run dry, peter out; to be exhausted, be depleted, become less, diminish, decrease; to dwindle, decline; to die │ ال ينضب inexhaustible, incessant IV to exhaust, drain, deplete, dry up (ھ s.th.)
ناضب nāḍib pl. نضب nuḍḍab dried up, dry; arid, barren, sterile
نضج naḍija a (naḍj) to be or become ripe, ripen, mature (also fig., of an affair, of a personality, or the like); to be well- cooked, be or become well done (meat); to maturate (tumor) IV to bring to ripeness or maturity, make ripe, ripen (ھ s.th.); to let (ھ s.th.) ripen; to cook well, do well (ھ s.th.)
نضج naḍj, nuḍj ripeness, maturity
نضوج nuḍūj ripeness, maturity
نضيج naḍīj ripe, mature; well-cooked, well done (food)
ناضح nāḍij ripe, mature; well-cooked, well done (food)
نضح naḍaḥa i (naḍḥ) to wet, moisten, sprinkle, spray, splash (ه ب s.th. with); to water (ھ plants); to slake, quench (ھ thirst); to defend, protect (عن s.th.); to justify, vindicate (عن s.th.), answer (عن for); -- a (naḍḥ) to exude or ooze a fluid (ب); to sweat, perspire; to leak; to flow over (ب with); to shed, spill (ھ s.th.); to effuse (ھ s.th.)
O نضاحة naḍḍāḥa sprinkler
منضح minḍaḥa shower, douche
manāḍiḥ  مناضح pl. minḍaḥa منضحة
watering can; shower, douche
نضد naḍada i (naḍd) to pile up, stack, tier, arrange in layers (ھ s.th.); to put in order, array, arrange (ھ s.th.) II do.; to compose, set (ھ s.th.; typ.)
نضد naḍad pl. انضاد anḍād, bedstead; pile, stack, rows, tiers (e.g., of sacks)
نضد nuḍud tables
نضيد naḍīd arranged one above the other, tiered, in rows, in layers; orderly, tidy, regular
نضيدة naḍīda pl. نضائد naḍā’id  cushion, pillow, mattress
منضدة minḍada pl. -āt, مناضد manāḍid  table; worktable, desk; bedstead; framework, rack, stand
تنضيد tanḍīd typesetting, composition (typ.)
منضد munaḍḍid pl. -ūn typesetter, compositor (typ.)
منضح munaḍḍad forming a regular string, regularly set (esp., of teeth)
نضر naḍara u, naḍira a and naḍura u (نضرة naḍra, نضور nuḍūr, نضارة naḍara) to be flourishing, blooming, verdant, fresh, beautiful; to be bright, brilliant, luminous, radiant II to make (ھ s.th.) shine; to make (ھ s.th.) bloom V to be verdant, blooming, in blossom
نضر naḍir flourishing, blooming, verdant, fresh, radiant, glowing
نضرة naḍra bloom, dower, freshness; glamour, splendor; beauty; health, vigor; opulence, wealth
نضار nuḍār (pure) gold
نضارة naḍāra bloom, dower, freshness; youthfulness; gracefulness, grace; health, vigor 972
نضير naḍīr flourishing, blooming, verdant, fresh, radiant, glowing; gold
ناضر nāḍir flourishing, blooming, verdant, fresh, radiant, glowing, beautiful
نضف naḍaf wild marjoram
نضف naḍif dirty, unclean
نضيف naḍīf dirty, unclean
نضل naḍala u (naḍl) to surpass, beat, defeat (ه s.o.) III to try to surpass (ه s.o.), vie, compete, contend, dispute (هwith s.o.); to defend (عن.o.)s stand up for s.o. (عن) VI to vie with one another
نضال niḍāl struggle, strife, dispute, controversy, fight, battle; contest, competition: defense, defensive battle
نضالي niḍālī combative, pugnacious
مناضلة munāḍala struggle, strife, dispute, controversy, fight, battle; contest, competition; defense, defensive battle
 مناضل munāḍil fighters combatant, defender
نضناض naḍnāḍ hissing viciously, flicking its tongue menacingly (snake)
نضو) نضا) naḍā u (naḍw) to take off (ھ a garment, one’s clothes); to undress (عن s.o.), نفسه عن نضا to get undressed; (naḍw, nuḍūw) to dwindles wane, decline; to fade (esp., color) II to take off (ھ a garment), strip (عن s.o.) of a garment (ھ) IV to exhaust, jades make lean (ھ a riding animal); to wear out, wear thin (ه s.th.) VIII to unsheathe (s a sword)
نضو naḍw pl. انضاء anḍā’ a worn, tattered garment
نضو niḍw pl. انضاء anḍā’ lean
نط naṭṭa u (naṭṭ) to spring, jumps leap; to skip, hop
نط naṭṭ jumping, jump │ الحبل نط n. al- ḥabl skipping the rope (children’s game); طولي نط ṭūlī) broad jump
نطة naṭṭa (n. vic.) jump, leap
نطاط naṭṭāṭ jumper; a variety of grasshopper; restless, ftighty, lightheaded
نطح naṭaḥa a (naṭḥ) to push, thrust (with the head or horns), butt III to bump ( ھ on or against s.th.), ram (ھ s.th.); to touch (ه s.th.) VI and VIII to thrust or butt one another; to struggle (with one another)
نطح naṭḥ push(ing), thrust(ing), butting; el Nath, a star in the horn of Aries, α Arietis (astron)
نطحة naṭḥa (n. vic.) push, thrust, butt نطاح naṭṭāḥ given to butting, a butter نطيح naṭīḥ butted
مناطحة munāṭaḥa bullfight
pl. as-saḥāb n. ناطحة السحاب nāṭiḥ: ناطح
skyscraper as-s. nawāṭiḥ نواطح السحاب
نطر naṭara u (naṭr, نطارة niṭāra) to watch, guard (ھ s.th.)
نطر naṭr watch, guard, protection نطارة niṭāra watch, guard, protection نطار nuṭṭār scarecrow
nuṭarā’ , نطراء nuṭṭār, نطار pl. nāṭir ناطر
نطرة naṭara, نواطر nawāṭir  guard, keeper,
warden (esp., of plantations and vineyards), rural warden; lookout in a ship’s crow’s-nest
ناطور nāṭūr pl. نواطير nawāṭīr  guard, keeper, warden (esp., of plantations and vineyards), rural warden; lookout in a ship’s crow’s-nest
ناطورة nāṭūra (syr.) (woman) chaperon
نطرون naṭrūn natron, esp., the native product of Egypt which is extracted from the salt lakes of Wādī Naṭrūn northwest of Cairo
نطس V to examine thoroughly, investigate carefully, scrutinize (عن s.th.); to possess or employ much skill, be proficient (ب in s.th.) 973
نطس naṭs, naṭus well-informed, knowledgeable, experienced, seasoned, skilled
نطاسي naṭāsī, niṭāsī well-informed, knowledgeable, experienced, seasoned, skilled; (pl. نطس nuṭus) a skilled, experienced physician
نطع pass. nuṭi’a to change colors, turn pale V to be pigheaded, obstinate
نطع naṭ’, niṭ’ pl. انطاع anṭā’, نطوع nuṭū’ leather mat used as a tablecloth and gaming boards in former times also during executions
نطع niṭ’, niṭa’ pl. نطوع nuṭū’ hard palate
the an-nāṭi’a al-ḥurūf الحروف الناطعة (phon.) ط and ت، د sounds
نطفان tanṭāf, تنطاف (naṭf, i u naṭafa نطف
naṭafān, نطافة niṭāfa) to dribble, trickle
نطفة nuṭfa pl. نطف nuṭaf drop; sperm
نطق naṭaqa u (nuṭq, نطوق nuṭūq, منطق manṭiq) to articulate; to talk, speak, utter (ب s.th.); to pronounce (ب s.th.) │ بكلمة نطق (bi- kalima) to lay a word II to make (ه s.o.) speak or pronounce; to gird, girdle (ه s.o.) IV to make (ھ s.o.) speak or talk V to gird o.s.; to be surrounded X to question (ھ s.o.); to interrogate, examine, cross- examine (ھ s.o.)
نطق nuṭq articulated speech; pronunciation; word, saying, utterance; order, ordinances decree │ النطق صدر  ب السامي it was decreed by order of His
 Majesty that ...; بالحكم نطق (ḥukm) pronouncement of sentence; النطق فاقد dumfounded, speechless
نطقي nuṭqī phonetic(al)
نطاr niṭāq pl. نطق nuṭuq girths girdle, belt; O garrison belt; circle, ring, enclosure; limit, boundary; range, extent, scope, compass, sphere, domain, purview; cordon │ الجوزاء نطاق n. al-jauzā’ Orion’s Belt (astron.); الحصار نطاق blockade ring; النطاق واسع comprehensive; extensive, far- reaching; large-scale
منطق manṭiq (faculty of) speech; manner of speaking, diction, enunciation; eloquence; logic │ ان المنطق من ليس it is illogical to …; المنطق علم ‘ilm al-m. logic
منطقي manṭiqī logical; dialectic(al); -- (pl. مناطقة manāṭiqa) logician; dialectician
منطق minṭaq pl. مناطق manāṭiq  belt, girdle
belt,   manāṭiq مناطق pl. minṭaqa منطقة sphere, range, vicinity, zone; girdle; O │ sector (mil.) O territory; area, district, المنطقة الحارة territory; occupied منطقة االحتالل O tropics; the Zones Torrid the (ḥārra) منطقة البروج fields; oil area, oil منطقة البترول al- m. منطقة الجوزاء (astron.); zodiac the منطقة حرام O (astron.); Belt Orion’s jauzā’ area; prohibited منطقة ممنوعة or (ḥarām) منطقة O zone; war al-ḥarb m. منطقة الحرب منطقة صماء O zone; free (ḥurra) حرة waves); radio (of zone dead (ṣammā’) O area; industrial (ṣinā’īya) منطقة صناعية O fire; of field aḍ-ḍarb m. منطقة الضرب zone; spherical (kurawīya) منطقة كروية two the (mu’tadilatān) المنطقتان المعتدلتان منطقة مجردة من O Zones; Temperate
ḥarbīya) (mujarrada, التجھيزات الحربية of sphere منطقة النفوذ zone; demilitarized influence
منطقي minṭaqī zonal
منطيق minṭīq very eloquent
استنطاق istinṭāq examination, interrogation, hearing; questioning
ناطق nāṭiq talking, speaking; endowed with the faculty of speech; eloquent; plain, distinct, clear; endowed with reason, reasonable, rational (being); speaker (also, e.g., in parliament); spokesman │ الناطقون
بالضاد the Arabic-speaking portion of mankind (lit.: those who pronounce the ḍād) ناطق حيوان (ḥayawān 974 nāṭiq) rational being; ناطق دليل conclusive evidence; ناطق شريط sound film; ناطقة جريدة newsreel
منطوق manṭūq pronounced, uttered, expressed; wording; text; statement; formulation │ بالمنطوق according to the text; expressly, explicitly, unequivocally; الحكم منطوق m. al-ḥukm dispositive portion of the judgment (jur.); العقد منطوق m.
al-’aqd the exact terms of the contract; القانون منطوق text of the law, legal text;  الكلمة منطوق m. al-kalima literal meaning of a word
مستنطق mustanṭiq examining magistrate
نطل naṭala u (naṭl) to squeeze out; to apply warm compresses (ھ to), foment, bathe with warm water or medicated liquid (ھ s.th.)
نطول naṭūl warm compress; fomentation, lavation or hath in a medicated liquid
نطنط naṭnaṭa to hop up and down, skip
نظر naẓara u (naẓar, منظر manẓar) to perceive with the eyes, see, view, eye, regard (ه ھ، or الى s.o., s.th.), look, gaze, glance (ه ھ، or الى at), watch, observe, notice (ه ھ، or الى s.o., s.th.), pay attention (ه ھ، or الى to); to expect (ھ s.th.); to envisages consider, contemplates purpose (ھ or في s.th.); to have in mind, have in view (الى s.th.), put one’s mind, direct one’s attention (الى to s.th.); to take up, try, hear (في a case; court), look into a case (في), examine (ھ or في a case); to judge, rule, decide (بين between two litigant parties); to take care (ل of s.o.), help (ل s.o.), stand by s.o. (ل), look after s.o. (شزرا اليه نظر │ (ل (šazran) to give s.o. a sidelong glances look askance at s.o.; القضية في) القضية نظر) (qaḍīya) to try a case (jurs); طلب في نظر  فالن (ṭalabī f.) to process s.o.’s application, take care of s.o.’s application; فرجة من نظر المفتاح فوھة) المفتاح) (furjat l-miftāḥ, fūhati l- m.) to peep through the keyhole; بعده انظر unẓur ba’dahū see below! ظھره انظر (ẓahrahū) see reverse! please turn over! II to make comparisons, draw parallels (بين between) III to equal (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), be
 equal (ه ھ، to s.o., to s.th.); to equalize, put on an equal footing (ه ھ، ب s.o., s.th. with), equate, liken, compare (ه ھ، ب s.o., s.th. to); to vie, compete, be in competition (s with s.o.), rival (ه s.o.); to argue, debate, dispute (ه with s.o.), point out (ه ب to s.o. s.th.) by way of argument or objection, confront (ه ب s.o. with); to superintend, supervise (ھ s.th.) IV to grant (ه s.o.) a delay or respite V to regard, watch or observe attentively (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), look closely (ه ھ، at s.o., at s.th.), scrutinize (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to bide one’s time, wait VI to face each other, lie opposite; to he symmetrical (math.); to dispute, argue (with one another); to quarrel (على about), fight (على over s.th.); to contend (with each other) (على for s.th.), contest each other’s right (على to s.th.) VIII to wait (ه for s.o.), expect (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), await, anticipate (ھ s.th.); to look closely (ه at s.o.); to look on expectantly, bide one’s time,
wait │ من الكبير الشيء انتظر to expect much of …; خير كل ورائه من انتظر (wara’ihi kulla kairin) to set the greatest expectations in s.th. X to wait, await, expect; to have patience, be patient; to request a delay or respite; to ask (ه s.o.) to wait, keep (ه s.o.) waiting
نظر naẓar pl. انظار anẓār seeing, eyesight, vision; look, glance, gaze; sight; outlook, prospect; view; aspect; appearance, evidence; insight, discernment, penetration; perception; contemplation; examination (في of); inspection, study, perusal; consideration, reflection; philosophical speculation; theory; handling (في of a 975 matter); trial, hearing (في of a case in court); supervision, control, surveillance; competence, jurisdiction; attention, heed, regard, notice, observance, respect, consideration, care │ (ل or) نظر in view of, with a view to, in regard to, with respect to, in consideration of, on the basis of, due to, because of, for; ل بالنظر do.;
عن النظر بصرف (bi-ṣarfi n-n.) or النظر بقطع عن (bi-qaṭ‘i n-n.) regardless of, irrespective of; النظر تحت under considerations being studied, being dealt with; الى النظر دون irrespective of,
regardless of; نظري في in my eyes, in my opinion; فى للنظر for the study of, for consideration, for further examination of, for handling …, for action on …; O النظر الحياة الى (ḥayāh) weltanschauung; النظر اعادة i‘ādat an-n. re-examination, reconsideration, resumption, retrial, revision; النظر اھل ahl an-n. speculative thinkers; theoreticians, theorists; النظر بعيد or النظر طويل farsighted; النظر قصر qiṣar
an-n. shortsightedness; النظر قصير shortsighted; النظر ذات المحكمة (maḥkama) the court of competent jurisdiction; مسألة نظر فيھا (mas’ala) an unsettled, open question, an unsolved problem; نظر له من (man) s.o. noteworthy, a distinguished man; the responsibles or authorized, person; بالنظر اخذ to catch the eye; نظره ادار في (adāra) to let one’s eyes roam over …; ل بالنظر (راجع) تابع falling to the responsibility of, under the jurisdiction of, subject to the authority of; اليه النظر سارق or النظر سارقه or اليه النظر استرق (naẓara) to glance furtively at s.o., give s.o. a surreptitious look; نظر األمر ھذا في this matter calls for careful study, will have to be considered; عن النظر قطع to take no account of, disregard s.th.; فالن نظر تحت ھو he is under the protection of so-and-so, he is patronized by so-and-so
نظر similar, like; equal │ النظر عديم unparalleled, unequaled, matchless, unique of his (its) kind
نظرة naẓra pl. naẓarāt looks glance; sights view; viewings contemplation (الى of s.th.); pl. نظرات (philosophical) reflections
نظرة naẓira delay, postponements deferment (of an obligation)
نظري naẓarī optic(al); visual; theoretic(al); speculative
نظرية naẓarīya theory; theorem; reflection, meditation, contemplation
نظير naẓīr pl. نظراء nuẓarā’ , f. pl. نظائر naẓā’r  similar, like, same, equal, matching, corresponding, comparable; an equivalent; facings opposites parallel; (with foll. genit.) in the manner of. in the same manner as, just like, just as; transcript, copy │ نظير naẓīra (prep.) as a compensation for, in consideration of, in
 return for, in exchange for, for, on, e.g., مليما خمسين دفع نظير (daf‘ k. malīman) on paying 50 millièmes; نظراؤه people of his kinds people like him; السمت نظير n. as- samt or النظير nadir (astr.); (منقطع) مقطوع النظير incomparable; نظير له ليس unparalleled, unequaled, matchless, unique of his (its) kind
نظيرة naẓīra head, foremost rank │ في نظيرة (with foils genit.) at the head of
نظار naẓẓār keen-eyed; (pl. نظارة
naẓẓāra) spectator, onlooker
نظارة naẓẓāra pl. -āt field glass, binocular; telescope, spyglass; (pair of) eyeglasses, spectacles (occasionally also pl. نظارات with singular meaning: a pair of eyeglasses); (pair of) goggles │ فردية نظارة (fardīya) or واحدة نظارة eyeglass, monocle; O معظمة نظارة (mu’aẓẓima) magnifying glass; الميدان نظارة n. al-maidān field glass
نظاراتي naẓẓārātī optometrist; optician
نظارة niẓāra supervision, control, inspection, management, administration, direction; ministry (now obsolete) 976
ناظور nāẓūr field glass
منظر manẓar pl. مناظر manāẓir  sight; view, panorama; look(s), appearance, aspect; prospect, outlook, perspective; an object soon or viewed, photographic object; scene (of a play); spectacle; stage setting, set, scenery; place commanding a sweeping view; lookout, watchtower │ عام منظر (‘āmm) general view, panorama, landscape, scenery; O خارجية مناظر (kārijīya) shots on location (in motion- picture making); طبيعية مناظر (ṭabī‘īya) scenic views, scenery, landscapes
منظرة manẓara pl. مناظر manāẓir  place commanding a scenic view; view, scenery, landscape, panorama; watchtower, observatory; guestroom, reception room, drawing room, parlor
O منظر minẓar (pair of) eyeglasses, spectacles; telescope, spyglass
منظار minẓār pl. مناظير manāẓīr  telescope, spyglass; magnifying glass; mirror, speculum, -scope (e.g., laryngoscope) │ معظم منظار (mu‘aẓẓim) magnifying glass; اسود بمنظار رقب (aswada)
to have a pessimistic outlook, look on the dark side of everything
منا□ظرة munāẓara emulation, rivalry, competition; quarrel, argument. altercation, debate, dispute, discussion, controversy; supervision, control, inspection
تناظر tanāẓur difference of opinion, squabble, wrangle, altercation; symmetry (math.)
انتظار intiẓār waiting, wait; expectation
unexpectedly على غير انتظار │
ناظر nāẓir pl. نظار nuẓẓār observer, viewer, spectator, onlooker; overseer, supervisor; inspector; manager, director, superintendent, administrator, principal, chief, (cabinet) minister (now obsolete) │ الوقف ناظر n. al-waqf trustee of a wakf, administrator of a religious endowment
ناظرة nāẓira administratress, directress, manageress, headmistress, matron
ناظرة nāẓir and ناظرة nāẓira pl. نواظر nawāẓir  eye; look. glance │ ناظريه بين (nāẓiraihi) before his eyes
منظور manẓūr seen; visible; foreseen, anticipated, expected; supervised, under supervision, controlled; envied, regarded with the evil eye; under consideration (case), pending (complaint, lawsuit; امام in a court) │ اليه منظور one under supervision, subordinate, underling, protégé, charge, ward, pupil; منظور غير invisible; unforeseen, unexpected; منظورة ادوات (adawāt) visual training aids; منظورة دعوى (da‘wā) pending lawsuit; في المنظور الشخص أمره (šakṣ) person whose case is under consideration
مناظر munāẓir similar, like, equal; competitor, rival, adversary, opponent (esp., in a discussion); interlocutor
نظف naẓufa u (نظف naẓufa) to be clean, cleanly, neat, tidy II to clean, cleanse, polish (ھ s.th.) V to clean o.s., become clean
نظافة naẓāfa cleanness, cleanliness, neatness, tidiness
نظيف naẓīf pl. نظفاء nuẓafā’ , نظاف niẓāf clean, neat, tidy; well-groomed, well- tended
 انظف anẓaf  cleaner, neater
تنظيف tanẓīf pl. -āt cleaning, cleansing
manicure تنظيف األظفار │
نظلي naẓlī (eg.) delicate, feminine
نظم naẓama i (naẓm, نظام niẓām) and II to string (ھ pearls); to put in order, to order (ھ s.th.); to array, arrange, classify, file (ھ s.th.); to adjust (ھ s.th.); to set, regulate (ھ s.th.); to tune (ھ an instrument); to layout, get ready, prepare (ھ s.th.); to set right, rectify, correct (ھ s.th.); to put together, group, make up, 977 assemble (ھ s.th.); to organize (ھ s.th.); to stage (ھ s.th.); to compose (one’s words) metrically, poetize, versify, write poetry V and VI to be strung; to be ordered, be in good order, be well-arranged, be well-organized VIII do.; to be classified; to affiliate (في with); to enter, join (في an organization, a corporation); to permeate, pervade (ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to come over s.o. (ه), seize, befall, overcome (ه s.o., ھ s.o.’s limbs, s.o.’s body; of a sentiment, tremor, shudder, etc.)
نظم naẓm order; arrangement; system; institution, organization; string of pearls; verse, poetry
نظام niẓām pl. -āt, نظم nuẓum, انظمة anẓima proper arrangement, regularity; conformity, congruity; methodical, organic structure; organization; order; method; system; rule, statute, law; system of regulations │ النظام ھذا على along this line, in this manner; األجانب نظام alien status; alien act; الشخصية األحوال نظام (šakṣīya) personal statute (jur.); اساسي نظام (asāsī) (basic) constitutional law, statutes, constitution; اقتصادي نظام (iqtiṣādī) economic system; البادية نظام al-bādiya agricultural system; واإلدارة البوليس نظام n. al-būlīs wa-l-idāra police and administrative system; السفر جوازات نظام n.
jawāzāt as-safar passport system; الحياة نظام
n. al-ḥayāt (way of) life; الرأسمالي النظام (ra’smālī) the capitalistic economic system; العام النظام (‘āmm) public order; نظام المرور traffic laws
نظامي niẓāmī orderly, regular, normal; methodical, systematic; regular (army)
تنظيم tanẓīm arrangement; readjustment, reorganization, reform; control, regulation, adjustment; organization; tactics; road construction (Eg.) │ تنظيم المرور traffic control; التنظيم اعادة i‘ādat t-t. reorganization
انتظام intiẓām order, regularity; methodicalness, systematic arrangement │ بانتظام regularly, accurately; انتظام في regular, fixed, ordered, methodical, systematic, orderly, normal
ناظم nāẓim arranger; organizer, adjuster; regulator; versifier, poet; (pl. نواظم nawāẓim ) weir, barrage (Ir.)
منظوم manẓūm ordered, orderly, tidy; metrical, poetical; poem; pl. -āt poetries, poetical works
منظومة manẓūma treatise in verse, didactic poem; row, rank
منظم munaẓẓim arranger, organizer; promoter, sponsor
منظم munaẓẓam arranged, ordered, kept in order, orderly, tidy; neat, welltended, well-kept; systematically arranged, systematized; regular │ منظم جيش (jaiš) regular army; منظم غير irregular
منظم munaẓẓama pl. -āt organization │ والزراعة التغذية منظمة (m. at-tagdīya) Food and Agriculture organization, F. A.O.
منتظم muntaẓim regular; even, uniform, steady, orderly; methodical; systematic │ O منتظمة موجات (maujāt) uniform waves (radio)
نعب na‘aba a i (na‘b, نعيب na‘īb) to croak, caw (raven); -- a (na‘b) to speed along
نعاب nu‘āb croak(ing), caw (of a raven)
نعاب na‘‘āb croaking, cawing; ominous, ill-boding
نعت na’ata a (na’t) to describe, characterize (
ه ھ، s.o. s.th.), qualify (ھ s.th.)
نعت naft description, qualification, characterization; -- (pl. نعوت nu’ūt) quality, property, attribute, characteristic; descriptive, qualifying word, qualifier; attribute (gram.); epithet 978
نعتي na‘tī descriptive, qualifying, qualificative
 منعوت man‘ūt substantive accompanied by as attribute
نعجة na‘ja pl. na‘ajāt, نعاج ni‘āj female sheep, ewe
نعر na‘ara a i (نعير na‘īr, نعار ni‘ār) to grunt; to cry, scream, roar, bellow; to spurt, gush forth (blood from a wound)
نعرة na‘ra Daile, din, clamor, roar
نعرة nu‘ara pl. -āt, نعر nu‘ar horsefly, gadfly
نعرة na‘ara, nu‘ara pl. -āt haughtiness, arrogance, pride │ اقليمية نعرة (iqlīmīya) jingoism, chauvinism
نعار na‘‘ār noisy, uproarious, vociferous, clamoring, shouting; agitator, rabble rouser
نعير na‘īr noise, din, clamor, shouting; bellowing, mooing, lowing (esp., of cattle)
نعارة na‘āra, na‘‘āra earthen jug (sometimes with two handles), pot
ناعور nā‘ūr O hemophilia
ناعورة nā‘ūra pl. نواعر nawā‘ir  noria,
Persian wheel
نعس na‘asa a u (na‘s) to be sleepy, drowsy; to take a nap, to doze, slumber; to be dull, listless, slack, stagnant (market, trade) II and IV to make sleepy, put to sleep (ه s.o.) VI to pretend to be sleepy or asleep; to doze, be sleepy, feel drowsy
نعسة na‘sa doze, nap, slumber
نعاس nu‘ās sleepiness, drowsiness; lethargy
نعسان na‘sān  sleepy, drowsy
ناعس nā‘is pl. نعس nu‘s sleepy, drowsy; dozing, slumbering
نعش na‘aša a (na‘š), II and IV to raise, lift up; to revive, reanimate; to refresh, invigorate, animate, arouse, stimulate, enliven, inspirit (ه s.o.) VIII to rise from a fall; to recover, recuperate from illness; to be animated, be refreshed, be stimulated, be invigorated, be strengthened, revive, come to new life
نعش n‘š bier │ الصغرى نعش بنات banāt n. a□-ṣugrā Ursa Minor (astron.); نعش بنات الكبرى b. n. al-kubrā Ursa Major (astron.)
al-maut n. نعشة الموت na‘ša: نعشة
euphoria; swan song, death song
انعاش in‘āš animation, reanimation, resuscitation, restoration to life; refreshment; reconstruction, restoration │ O اقتصادي انعاش (iqtiṣādī) economic boost
انتعاش inti‘āš resurgence, revival; animation, invigoration, stimulation, refreshment, recreation
منعش mun‘iš animating, refreshing, invigorating, restorative
نعظ na‘aẓa a (na‘ẓ, na‘aẓ, نعوظ nu‘ūẓ) to be erect (penis) IV to be sexually excited
ناعوظ nā‘ūẓ exciting sexual desire, sexually stimulating, aphrodisiac
نعق na‘aq a i (na‘q, نعيق na‘īq) to croak, caw (raven); to bleat (sheep); to cry, scream, screech
ناعق nā‘iq: وناعر ناعق كل that is alive and astir, everybody and his brother, every Tom, Dick and Harry
نعل na‘ala a (na‘l), II and IV to furnish with shoes (ه s.o.), shoe (ه s.o., ھ a horse); -- na‘ila a (na‘al) to be shod V = na‘ila VIII to wear sandals; to wear shoes, be shod
نعل na‘l pl. نعال ni‘āl, انعل an‘ul sandal; shoe; horseshoe
ناعل nā‘il shod; soled 979
نعم na‘ama u a and na‘ima a (نعمة na‘ma, منعم man‘am) to live in comfort, and luxury, lead a life of ease, lead a comfortable and carefree life; to be delighted (ب by), be happy, be glad (ب about, at), be pleased ( ب with), delight, take pleasure (ب in); to enjoy, savor, taste, experience (ب s.th.) │ ب باال نعم (na‘ima bālan) to feel serene and confident about ...; -- na‘ima a (na‘am) to be green and tender (twig); to be or become fine, powdery; -- na‘uma u (نعومة nu‘ūma) to be soft, tender, smooth II to smooth, soften (ھ s.th.); to pulverize, powder (ھ s.th.); to accustom to luxury (ه s.o.); to pamper, coddle, effeminate, provide with a life of ease (ه s.o.) IV to make good, nice, comfortable, pleasant (ھ or ب s.th.); to give (على ب s.o. s.th.), bestow, confer (على ب upon s.o. s.th.); to bestow favors (على upon s.o.), be graciously disposed (على toward s.o.); to
 apply o.s., devote o.s. (في to s.th.), take great pains (في with s.th.) │ صباحك ﷲ انعم (ṣabāḥaka) good morning! في النظر انعم (naẓara) to look closely at, scrutinize s.th., regard s.th. attentively, pore over s.th., become engrossed in, ponder s.th. V to live in luxury, lead a life of ease and comfort; to enjoy (ب s.th.)
نعم ni‘ma with foll. indeclinable noun with article and nominative ending: what a perfect ..., wonderful ...! truly, an excellent ... │ زيد الرجل نعم n. r-rajulu zaidun what an excellent man Zaid is! نعم شبابھم الشباب n. š-šabābu šabābuhum what a wonderful youth they have! الخليل نعم انه innahū n. al-kalīlu he is a wonderful friend indeed! ونعمت فبھا fa-bihā wa-ni‘mat in that case it’s all right; فعلت ما نعم (fa‘alta) well done!
نعم na‘am yes! yes indeed! certainly! surely! (introducing a verbal clause:) to be sure ... ; na’am’ (colloq.) I beg your pardon? what did you say?
نعم na‘am pl. انعام an‘ām grazing livestock (sheep, camels, cattle, goats)
نعمة na’ma life of ease, good living; amenity, comfort; prosperity; happiness; enjoyment, pleasure, delight
نعمة ni‘ma pl. نعم ni‘am, انعم an‘um, نعما ت ni‘māt, ni‘imāt benefit, blessing, boon, benefaction, favor, grace, kindness │ بنعمة ﷲ by the grace of God; النعمة واسع very well off, wealthy, rich; الثالثة النعم the Three Graces; نعمه) نعمته ولي) walīy ni‘matihī (ni‘amihī) his benefactor
نعمى nu‘mā happiness
نعماء na‘mā’ favor, good will, grace │ والبأساء النعماء في (wa-l-ba’sā’) in good and bad days
شقائق النعمان│ blood nu‘mān نعمان
anemone (bot.)
نعام na‘ām (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. نعائم
na‘ā’im  ostrich (zool.)
نعيم na‘īm amenity, comfort, ease, happiness, felicity; gentle, tranquil, peaceful │ ﷲ نعيم the grace of God, the blessings of God
النعائم an-na‘ā’im name of several stars in Sagitta (astron.)
نعومة nu‘ūma softness, smoothness, tenderness, delicacy, fineness, finely ground state, powdery consistency │ من اظفاره نعومة (منذ) from his earliest youth, since his tender age
انعم an‘am  sorter
منعام min‘ām munificent benefactor
مناعم manā‘im  favors, blessings, boons; amenities, comforts, pleasures, delights
تنعيم tan‘īm pampering, coddling, effemination
انعام in‘ām act of kindness, favor, benefaction; gift, donation, grant, distinction, 980 bestowal, award │ انعام النظر i. an-naẓar careful examination, serious consideration
ناعم nā‘im soft; smooth; tender; fine, powdery │ الظفر ناعم n. aẓ-ẓufr young, youthful, tender; ناعم سكر (sukkar) powdered sugar
منعم mun‘im donor, benefactor
نعنع na‘na‘ and نعناع na‘nā‘ mint (bot.); peppermint
نعناعي na‘nā‘ī peppermint (adj.)
نعى na‘ā a (na‘y, na‘īy, نعيان na‘yān) to announce the death (ھ of s.o., الى to s.o.);
to hold s.th. (ھ) against s.o. (على), reproach, blame (على ھ s.o. for); -- na‘ā i to lament, wail; to deplore (ھ s.th.)
نعي naīy one who announces s.o.’s death; blame, reproach
نعية na‘ya pl. na‘ayāt news of s.o.’s death, death notice
مناع pl. man‘āh منعاة and man‘an منعى
manā‘in news of s.o.’s death
نغبة nagba, nugba swallow, gulp, draught
نغبشة nagbaša noise
نغز nagaza a (nagz) to tickle (ه s.o.); to prick (ه s.o., with a needle, or the like); to sow dissension, stir up enmity (بين between)
نغش nagaša a (nagš, نغشان nagašān) to be agitated, be shaken III to play (ه with s.o.), tease (ه s.o.), dally, flirt (ه with s.o.) V = I
نغشة nagša pl. nagašāt motion; shaking
 نغاش nugāš and نغاشي nugāšī very small; midget, dwarf
نغاشة nagāša banter, raillery, teasing, playfulness; elegance
نغص II and IV to disturb, ruffle, spoil (على s.o.’s ھ pleasure, joy, life, or the like), make loathsome (على ھ to s.o. s.th.) V to be disturbed, be ruffled, be spoiled, become loathsome
منغص munaggiṣ exciting
نغل nagila a (nagal) to fester, suppurate (wound) │ على قلبه نغل (qalbuhū) to harbor resentment against, hold a grudge against
نغل nagl, nagil illegitimate child; bastard
نغيل nagīl illegitimate child; bastard
نغولة nugūla illegitimacy, bastardy
نغم nagama u i and nagima a (nagm, nagam) to hum a tune; to ling II and V do.
نغم nagm and nagam pl. انغام angām tune, air, melody; voice, part (mus., of a contrapuntal composition); timbre, tone color; sound, tone
نغمة nagima, nagama pl. nagamāt tone; sound; musical note, tone (of the gamut; mus.); inflection, intonation, melody; song, chant
تناغم tanāgum symphonia, concord (of sounds)
منغوم mangūm melodious (voice)
نغو) نغا) nagā u (nagw) and نغى nagā i (nagy) to speak (الى to s.o.) III to whisper (ه in s.o.’s ear); to talk gently, kindly, tenderly (ه to s.o., esp., to a child); to flatter, court (ه s.o.); to twitter (bird); (eg.) to babble (child)
نف naffa i to blow one’s nose; to snuff’
نفة naffa (tun.) pinch of snuff; snuff
نفاف naffāf snuffer
نفث nafata u i (naft) to spit, spit out, expectorate, discharge, cough out (ھ s.th.); to squirt out (ھ its venom; of a snake); to exhale, puff out (ھ the smoke; of a smoker); to utter, voice (ھ s.th.); to exude and inspire (ھ في with s.th. s.o.), transfuse (ھ في s.th. into s.o.) 981
نفث naft expectoration; saliva, spittle │ الشيطان نفث n. aš-šaiṭān erotic poetry
نفثة nafta pl. nafatāt expectoration; saliva, spittle; pl. expectorated or ejected matter, expectorations, discharge, outpourings, emissions, effusions; invectives, accusations │ األقالم نفثات literary productions
نفاثة nufāta saliva, spittle
plane jet naffāta )نفاثة )طائرة
نفاثي naffātī jet- (in compounds) │ تسيير نفاثي jet propulsion
نفاثة naffāta pl. -āt woman who spits on the knots (in exercising a form of Arabian witchcraft in which women tie knots in a cord and spit upon them with an imprecation; Kor. 113,4); sorceress
نفج nafaja u (nafj, نفجان nafajān, نفوج nufūj) to spring up and take to flight (game); to jump, leap, bound; to vaunt, brag, boast V to brag, boast VIII = I
نفج nafj bragging, boasting
نفاج nafāj braggart, show-off; snob
نافجة nllftia pl. نوافج nawāfij  musk bag; container for musk
نفح nafaḥa a (nafḥ, نفحان nafaḥān, نفاح nufāḥ) to spread, be diffused (fragrance), exhale a pleasant smell, be fragrant; to blow (wind); to make s.o. (ه) a present of (ب), present (ه ب s.o. with); to treat (ه ھ s.o. to s.th.) III to protect, defend (عن s.th.)
نفحة nafḥa pl. nafaḥāt breeze, gust; breath; diffusing odor; fragrance, perfume scent; gift, present
منفحة manfaḥa rennet
نفخ nafaka u (nafk) to blow, puff; to breathe; to blow up, inflate, fill with air (ھ or في s.th.); O to pump up, fill (a tire); O to fill with gas (balloon); to blow (ھ tunes, في on an instrument); to breathe s.th. (ھ) into s.o. (في). inspire (في ھ s.o. with); to inflate, puff up, elate, flush with success, fill with pride (ه s.o.) │ البوق في نفخ (būq) to blow the trumpet; روحه في نفخ (rūḥihī) to animate, inspirit s.o.; في نفخ صورته (ṣūratihī) to bring s.th. into being, give birth to s.th.; روحه زمارة في نفخ (zammārati rūḥihī) to rouse s.o.’s temper;
 الشمعة نفخ (šam‘a) to blowout a candle; نفخ شدقيه (šidqaihi) to be puffed up, become inflated VIII to be blown up, inflated, filled with air; to swell; to puff up, become inflated │ سحره انتفخ (saḥrahū) and مساحره انتفخت (masāḥiruhū) his lungs became inflated (out of fear or pride)
نفخ nafk blowing, blowing up, inflation, pumping up, filling with air
نفخة nafka (n. vic.) blow, puff; breath; gust; distention, inflation, swelling; conceit, overweeningness, haughtiness │ كاذبة) كذابة نفخة) (kaddāba) self-conceit, vainglory, bumptiousness
نفاخ naffāk flatulent
نفانخ nuffāk swelling
نفاخة naffāka bladder; bubble
منفخ minfak pl. منافخ manāfik  bellows
منفاخ minfāk pl. منافيخ manāfīk   bellows; air pump, tire pump; blowpipe
تنفخ tanaffuk inflatedness, inflation; bumptiousness, bumptious behavior
انتفاخ intifāk process of being inflated; distention, inflation, swelling, protuberance; flatulence, meteorism (med.) │ الرئة انتفاخ int. ar-ri’a pulmonic emphysema
نافخ nāfik blowing; blower; flatulent │ ضرمة نافخ بالدار ما (n. ḍarmatin) there is not a soul in the house
منفوخ manfūk blown up, puffed up, inflated; swollen; pumped up, inflated; 982 paunchy, obese, fat; conceited, self- conceited, overweening, snobbish
منتفخ muntafik blown up, puffed up, inflated; swollen
نفد nafida a (nafad, نفاد nafād) to be exhausted, depleted, used up; to run out, come to an end, dwindle away; to be out of print │ نفد الصبر معين لديه (ma‘īn aṣ-ṣabr) to be at the end of one’s patience IV and X to use up, consume, spend, exhaust, drain, deplete (ھ s.th.); to taste thoroughly, enjoy to the full (ھ
s.th.) │ وسع كل استنفد (kulla wus‘in) to exhaust, or avail o.s. of, every possibility
نفدة nafda pl. nafadāt entry (in an account book), booked item
نفاد nafād exhaustion, consumption, depletion (of stores), dwindling, wastage, waste
النفود an-nafūd Nafud (desert in N Nejd) نافد nāfid: الصبر نافد n. aṣ-ṣabr impatient نافدة nāfida void, vacuum
نفذ nafada u (نفاذ nafād, نفوذ nufūd) to pierce, bore (ھ s.th. or من through s.th.), penetrate (من ھ، s.th.), go or pass (ب ھ، through s.th.); to penetrate (الى into), get through, pass through (الى to); O (mil.) to break through, fight one’s way through the enemy (من or في); to get (الى to s.o.), arrive (الى at s.o.’s place), reach (الى s.o.); to lead (الى to), give, open (الى on; of a door or window); to communicate, be connected ( الى with; of a building, lot, premises), join; to be carried out, be executed, be legally valid, be effective, be operative, be enforceable, be executable, be executory; to do well or skillfully (في s.th.) II and IV to cause (ھ s.th.) to pierce or penetrate; to carry out, execute, accomplish, effect (ھ s.th., also, an idea), do, perform, fulfill, discharge (ھ a duty); to realize, implement, carry into effect (ھ a plan, a project, ideas); to enforce (ھ a resolution); to carry through (ھ a program); to execute, carry out (ھ a sentence; في against s.o.); to transmit, convey, send, dispatch, forward (ھ الى s.th. to s.o.) V to be executed, be carried out
نفذ nafad pl. انفاذ anfād opening, aperture, orifice, hole, vent, outlet, escape, way out
نفاذ nafād penetration, permeation; implementation, realization, effectuation; effectiveness; execution │ البصيرة نفاذ perspicacity, acute discernment, penetration
نفاذ nafād piercing, penetrating; effective, effectual; permeable, pervious
نفوذ nufūd penetration, permeation; effectiveness, effect, action; influence, prestige, authority │ مطلق نفوذ (muṭlaq) full powers, free hand, unlimited authority; ذو
 of sphere نطاق النفوذ influential; نفوذ influence
منفذ manfad, manfid pl. منافذ manāfid  opening in a wall, air hole, window; passage, passageway, exit; outlet; way out, escape; entrance, access; gateway, gate; loophole, dodge; O electrode (el.) │ O المياه منفذ m. al-miyāh flood gate, lock gate, sluice gate; البحري المنفذ (baḥrī) access to the sea
تنفيذ tanfīd carrying out, implementation, effectuation. realization; discharge, accomplishment, fulfillment, performance, execution; distraint, legal execution (jur.) │ التنفيذ (دور) طور في دخل (ṭauri, dauri t-t.) to become effective, come into force; التنفيذ عون ‘aun at-t. minor executory officer, bailiff (tun.); التنفيذ قسم qism at-t. executive division (of a court); للتنفيذ قابلة احكام executory decisions, precepts, executions, writs of fieri facias (jur.) 983
تنفيذي tanfīdī executory, executive │ لجنة تنفيذية (tanfīdīya) executive committee
انفاذ infād sending, dispatch, conveyance, delivery, transmission; carrying out, execution, discharge, performance
نافذ nāfid piercing, penetrating; effective, operative, effectual; legally valid │ نافذا اصبح (aṣbaḥa) to become operative, become effective, come into force (law); فيه نافذ الحكم (ḥukmu) the sentence will be carried out, has legal force; الكلمة نافذ n. al-kalima influential, powerful; المفعول نافذ valid, effective, in force; نافذ امر (amr) strict order
نافذة nāfida pl. نوافذ nawāfid  opening in a wall, air hole; window; O wicket │ O اإلطالق نافذة n. al-iṭlāq loophole, embrasure
منفذ munaffid executant, executer, executioner │ الوصية منفذ m. al-waṣīya executor (jur.); منفذ عون (‘aun) minor executory officer, bailiff (tun.)
متنفذ mutanaffid influential
نفر nafara u i (نفور nufūr, نفار nifār) to shy, bolt, stampede (animal); -- (nafar) to flee, run away; to have an aversion (من to), have a distaste (من for); to avoid, shun,
eschew (عن or من s.th.), keep clear (عن or من of), turn away, flee (عن or من from); to hurry, rush, hasten (ل or الى to); -- i (نفور nufūr) to swell, bulge out, protrude, jut out, stick out II to startle, frighten, scare away, chase away, drive away (ھ s.th.); to fill (ه s.o.) with an aversion (من to), arouse a distaste (ه من in s.o. for), make loathsome (ه من to s.o. s.th.), alienate, estrange, deter (ه من s.o. from), spoil s.o.’s (ه) pleasure (من in), make (ه s.o.) dissatisfied (من with) III to avoid (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), keep away (ه from s.o.), have an aversion (ه to s.o.); to contradict (ھ s.th.), be incompatible (ھ with) VI to avoid each other; to conflict, clash; to disagree, he incongruous, incompatible, mutually repellent X to he frightened away; to call upon s.o. (ه) to fight (على against), call out (ه s.o.) to go to war (على against)
نفر nafar pl. انفار anfār band, party, group, troop; troops; person, individual; (mil.) soldier, private; man (as a numerative)
نفرة nafra aversion, distaste, dislike, antipathy
نفور nufūr shying, flight; bolting, stampede (of an animal); aversion, distaste, dislike, displeasure, alienation, estrangement
نفور nufūr shy, easily frightened, scary, fearful, timid; reticent, diffident, bashful, coy, reserved
نفير nafīr pl. انفار anfār, انفرة anfira band, party, group, troop; departure into battle; trumpet │ عام نفير (‘āmm) general call to arms, levy en masse; general alarm
نافورة nāfūra pl. نوافير nawāfīr  fountain نوفرة naufara pl. نوافر nawāfir  fountain تنفير tanfīr estrangement, alienation,
repulsion, deterrence
تنافر tanāfur mutual aversion or repulsion, disagreement, disunion, dissension, conflict, strife, incongruity, discord
نافر nāfir pl. نفر nafr, nuffar fleeing, fugitive, shy, fearful, timid; having an aversion (من to) or a distaste (من for); swelling, protuberant, bulging, protruding,
 projecting, jutting out; relief-like, in relief; three-dimensional, 3-D (film)
منفر munaffir, munfir repulsive, repellent
نفاسة nifās, نفاس (nafas, u nafusa نفس
nafāsa) to be precious, valuable, priceless;
-- nafisa a (nafas) to be sparing, niggardly 984 (ب with s.th.); -- (نفاسة nafāsa) to envy, begrudge (على ه s.o. s.th.); -- nafisa a and pass. nufisa (نفاس nifās) to he in childbed II to cheer up, comfort, appease, reassure (ه s.o.); to relieve (عن s.o., of s.th., esp., of sorrow, cares), dispel, banish (عن s.o.’s ھ worries, anxieties); to air (عن one’s secret feelings), give vent (عن to one’s emotions), uncover, reveal, voice, get off one’s chest, get out of one’s system, abreact (عن one’s suppressed desires, frustrations, fears, etc.); to desist ( عن from), cease (عن doing s.th.); pass. nuffisa to get lost (عن to s.o.); to let out air, leak; to be in childbed III to compete, vie (ه عن with s.o. in); to compete, fight, struggle (على for), seek. try to obtain, desire (على s.th.), strive, be out (على for), aspire (على to) V to breathe, inhale and exhale; to take breath, pause for breath. have a breather, have a break, take a rest
│ المؤلمة الحسرات تنفس (al-ḥasarāti l- mu’lima) to heave painful sighs; تنفس الصعداء (ṣu‘adā’a) to sigh deeply; to breathe a sigh of relief, breathe again; تنفس األخير النفس (nafasa) to be at one’s last gasp, be dying; الحياة عن تنفس (ḥayāh) to breathe one’s last, die VI to rival, compete, vie, contend (على for, في in s.th.)
نفس nafs f., pl. نفوس nufūs, انفس anfus soul; psyche; spirit, mind; life; animate being, living creature, human being, person, individual (in this sense, masc.); essence, nature; inclination, liking, appetite, desire; personal identity, self (used to paraphrase the reflexive pronoun; see examples below) │ بنفسه he himself; personally, in person; بنفسوسنا نحن we ourselves; األمر نفس في (n. il-amr) in reality, actually, in fact; الواقع نفس في do.; انفسھم عند in their own opinion; بنفسه) نفسه ھو جأءني) he himself came to me, he came personally to see me; نفس من جاء he came of his own accord; وبين بيني فيما به وعدت ما نفسي what I had promised myself; األمر نفس
n.	al-amr the essence of the matter, the nature of the affair; الشيء نفس the thing itself; the same thing, the very thing; النفس على االعتماد and بالنفس الثقة (tiqa) self-
confidence, self-reliance; النفس بشق bi-šiqqi n-n. or األنفس بشق (following ال ... ال) with (the greatest) difficulty, barely; النفس صغير base-minded, low-minded; النفس عفيف unselfish, selfless, altruistic; النفس علم ‘ilm an-n. psychology; النفس كبير high-minded, proud; النفس محبة maḥabbat an-n. amour propre, selfishness; والنفيس النفس بذل to make every conceivable sacrifice, sacrifice all, give up all one’s possessions
نفسي nafsī spiritual, mental, psychic(al); (pl. -ūn) psychologist │ النفسي التحليل psychoanalysis; نفسية حالة state of mind, mood
نفسية nafsīya mental life, inner life, psyche; frame of mind; mentality, mental attitude, disposition; psychology
نفس nafas pl. انفاس anfās breath; whiff; puff (from a smoking pipe, from a cigarette); swallow, gulp, draught; style of an author; freedom, liberty, convenience, discretion │ األخير النفس حتى to the last breath; نفس ذو enough to slake the thirst; refreshing (drink); النفس ضيق ḍīq an-n. labored breathing, asthma; من نفس في ھو اموره he acts according to his own desires; امرك من نفس في انت (amrika) you can do as you please! نفاسه امسك (anfāsahū) to hold one’s breath; انفاسه فاضت (anfāsuhū) to give up the ghost
نفسة nufsa respite, delay
نفساء nafsā’  pl. نوافس nawāfis  confined, in childbed; a woman in childbed
طب │ mental psychic(al), nafsānī نفساني طبيب نفساني psychiatry; (ṭibb) نفساني 985 psychologist عالم نفساني psychiatrist;
O نفسانية nafsānīya psychology
نفاس nifās parturition; delivery, childbirth, confinement, accouchement; childbed, puerperium; see also below │ النفاس حمى ḥummā n-n. or نفاسية حمى puerperal fever, childbed fever
نفاسة naffāsa preciousness, costliness
نفيس nafīs precious, costly, valuable, priceless
 نفيسة nafīsa pl.. نفائس nafā’is  gem, object of value, precious thing
manāfis  منافس pl. manfas منفس
breathing hole, air hole, valve
تنفيس tanfīs airing, ventilation
منافسة munāfasa pl. -āt emulation; competition (also com.); rivalry; athletic event, contest, match
نفاس nifās emulation; competition (also com.); rivalry; athletic event, contest, match
تنفس tanaffus respiration
تنفسي tanaffusī: تنفسي جھاز (jahāz) respiratory system
تنافس tanāfus mutual competition, rivalry; fight, struggle (على for) │ تنافس حيوي (ḥayawī) struggle for existence
منافس munāfis competitor; rival
متنفس mutanaffas place to breathe freely; breathing space, free scope (for s.th.), free atmosphere; relief, escape, way out
نفش nafaša u (nafš) to tease (ھ wool); to swell out, puff up; to swell, become swollen; to ruffle its feathers (bird) II to comb or card (ھ cotton) V to puff up, become inflated; to ruffle the feathers, bristle the hair VIII do.
نفش nafaš wool
نفاش naffāš a variety of large lemon
منفوش manfūš puffed up, inflated; ruffled, bristling; disheveled (hair); fluffy (hair, wool)
نفض nafaḍa u (nafḍ) to shake (ھ s.th.), shake off (ھ عن s.th. from), shake out, dust, dust off (ھ s.th.); to knock the ashes from a cigarette (ھ); to make (ه s.o.) shiver (fever); -- u (نفوض nufūḍ) to recover, recuperate (من from) │ عنه نفض الكسل (kasala) or كسله غبار نفض (gubāra kasalihī) to shake off one’s laziness; نفض غباره (gubārahū) lit.: to shake off its dust, i.e., to have reached the end of, be finished with; الھم عنه نفض (hamma) to shake off one’s sorrows, shed one’s anxiety; األوراق لعب في نفض (la‘ibi l-aurāq) to gamble away at cards; األمر من يده نفض
(yadahū, amr) to chuck s.th., shake off s.th., rid o.s. of, refuse to have anything to do with; فالن يد من يده نفض to break with s.o. dissociate o.s. from, go back on s.o. II to shake violently, shake out, dust off (ھ s.th.) IV to use up completely, exhaust (ھ provisions, stores); to be devoid of all means, be reduced to poverty, be impoverished, be depleted; to shake off (
ه عن s.o. from); to remove, dismiss (ه عن
s.o. from) VIII to be shaken off, be dusted off; to shake; to shudder, shiver, tremble ( من with) │ واقفا انتفض (wāqifan) to jump up, jump to one’s feet
نفض nafaḍ that which is shaken off or falls off
نفضي nafḍī: O نفضية غابة deciduous forest, leafy forest
نفضة nafaḍa scouting party, reconnaissance patrol
نفضة nufaḍa ague fit, feverish shiver نفاض nufāḍ ague fit, feverish shiver نفاضة nufāḍa that which is shaken off or
falls off 986
نفيضة nafīḍa pl. نفائض nafā’iḍ  scouting party, reconnaissance patrol
منفض minfaḍ sieve; winnow
manāfiḍ  منافض pl. minfaḍa منفضة
ashtray; feather duster; O vacuum cleaner
انتفاض intifāḍ shaking, shiver, shudder, tremor
انتفاضة intifāḍa (n. vic.) shiver, shudder, tremor
نفط nafṭ naphtha, petroleum
نفطي nafṭī of naphtha, soaked in naphtha; oil-, petroleum- (in compounds) I نفطي مصباح (miṣbāḥ) oil lamp
نفطة nafṭa blister
نفطة nufaṭa irritable, touchy, thin- skinned; hot-tempered
منفط munaffiṭ blistering, vesicatory
نفع nafa‘a a (naf‘) to be useful, beneficial, advantageous, be of use (ه to s.o.), avail, help (ه s.o.); to be usable, to do, serve (ل for) │ ينفع ال of no use II to utilize, turn to use, put to use (ھ s.th.); to use (ھ s.th.),
 make use (ھ of) VIII to turn to advantage, turn to good account, put to use, utilize, use (من or ب s.th.), take advantage, avail o.s., make use (من or ب of); to profit, gain, benefit (من or ب by s.th.); to enjoy (من or ب s.th.) X=II
نفع naf‘ use, avail, benefit, advantage, profit, gain; good, welfare
نفع naf‘ out for one’s own advantage, self-interested, selfish; profiteer
نفاع naffā‘ very useful, of good use
نفوع nafū‘ pl. نفع nufu‘ very usنفعeful, of good use
منفعة manfa‘a pl. منافع manāfi‘  use, avail, benefit; beneficial use, useful service; advantage, profit, gain; (Isl. Law) yield of a utilizable thing or of a right, produce; interest; public establishment, public-service facility │ عمومية) عامة منافع) (‘āmma, ‘umūmīya) public-service facilities, specif., property set aside, or available, for public use; صحية منافع (ṣiḥḥīya) sanitary facilities
انتفاع intifā‘ use, employment, utilization, exploitation, usufruct; benefit, advantage, profit, gain
نافع nāfi’ useful, beneficial, advantageous, profitable, usable, serviceable; wholesome, salutary
وزير النافعة │ works public nāfi’a نافعة
minister of public works
منتفع muntafi’ beneficiary, usufructuary
نفق nafaqa u (نفاق nafāq) to sell well, find a ready market (merchandise); to be brisk, active (market); -- nafaqa and nafiqa a (nafaq) to be used up, he spent, run out (stores, provisions, money), be exhausted;
-- nafaqa u (نفوق nufūq) to die, perish (esp., of an animal) II to sell III to dissemble, dissimulate, play the hypocrite
│ ضميره نافق (ḍamīrahū) to act contrary to the dictates of one’s conscience IV to spend, expend, layout, disburse (ه على money for); to use up, consume, spend, exhaust, waste, squander, dissipate (ھ s.th.); to spend, pass (ھ time); to provide ( على for s.o., esp., for s.o.’s means of support), support (على s.o.), bear the cost of s.o.’s (على) maintenance V على بكذبة تنفق
(bi-kidbatin) to tell s.o. a fib X to spend, waste (ھ على money for)
نفق nafaq pl. نفاق anfāq tunnel, underground passageway
نفقة nafaqa pl. -āt, نفاق nifāq expense; cost; outlay, expenditure, disbursement; cost of living, maintenance, support; (Isl. Law) adequate support, esp., of the 987 wife; charitable gift, handout (to the poor)
قليل النفقات expense; s.o.’s at على نفقة │
inexpensive, cheap
نفاق nafāq brisk trade, good business; salability (of a commodity)
منفاق minfāq squanderer, wastrel, spendthrift, profligate
منافقة munāfaqa hypocrisy, dissimulation, dissemblance
نفاق nifāq hypocrisy, dissimulation, dissemblance
انفاق infāq spending, expenses, outlay, expenditure, disbursement
نافق nāfiq selling well, easily marketable, in demand (commodity)
منافق munāfiq hypocrite, dissembler
نفل V and VIII to do more than is required by duty or obligation, to supererogate (specif., prayers, charity, or the like)
نفل nafl supererogatory performance, specif., a work of supererogation
نفال nufūl, نفول anfāl, انفال pl. nafal نفل
nifāl booty, loot, spoil; present
نفل nafal clover
نافلة nāfila pl. نوافل nawāfil  supererogatory performance; work of supererogation; gift, present; booty, loot, spoil │ ان القول نافلة من (n. il-qaul) it goes without saying that ...
نفنف nafnaf pl. نفانف nafānif  air, atmosphere; steep hillside, precipitous cliff
نفنوف nafnūf (ir.) a woman’s dress
نفو) and نفي) نفا nafā u (nafw) and نفى nafā i (nafy) to expel, eject, oust, ostracize, exclude (عن or ه على s.o. from), remove, evict, banish, exile, expatriate (ه s.o.); to deport (ه s.o.); to refute, disprove, rebut, controvert, repudiate (ھ s.th.); to deny (ھ
 s.th.); to reject, dismiss, discard, disclaim, disavow, decline, refuse, disallow (ھ s.th.); to exclude, preclude (ھ s.th.); to negate (gram.) III to hunt, chase, pursue, track down (ه s.o.); to exclude, preclude ( ھ s.th.); to contradict (ھ s.th.), be contrary (ھ to); to be incompatible, be inconsistent (ھ with) VI to be mutually exclusive or contradicting, cancel each other out, be incompatible VIII to be banished, be exiled, be expelled; to be refuted, be disproved, be controverted, be contradicted, be denied; to fall off, fall away, be dropped, be omitted, be absent, be nonexistent X to reject as worthless, useless, unacceptable (ھ s.th.)
نفي nafy expulsion; banishment, exile, expatriation; ejection, ousting, eviction, ostracism; deportation; denial, disclaimer, disavowal, repudiation, disproof, refutation, rebuttal, refusal, rejection, disallowance, prohibition, ban; negation
(gram.) │ النفي حرف ḥarf an-n. particle of negation (gram.); نفي شاھد witness for the defense (as opposed to اثبات شاھد š. itbāt)
نفيي nafyī negative
نفي nafīy denied; rejected, discarded
نفاء nafā’, نفاة nafāh and نفاوة nafāwa s.th. discarded as worthless or useless; dross, refuse, waste, scrap, offal, sweepings, garbage
نفاية nufāya pl. -āt s.th. discarded as worthless or useless; remnant, remains; discard, castoff; reject, throwout; dross, refuse, waste, scrap, offal, sweepings, garbage; O نفايات excretions (biol.)
منفى manfan pl. مناف manāfin place of exile; banishment, exile
منافاة munāfāh contradiction, incompatibility, inconsistency
تناف tanāfin mutual incompatibility
انتفاء intifā’ absence, lack 988
منفي manfīy turned down, denied, rejected, discarded; negated, negative; banished, exiled, expatriated; deported
مناف munāfin incompatible
نق naqqa i (نقيق naqīq) to croak (frog); to cackle, cluck (hen)
نقاق naqqāq surly person, gruff man, grumbler; griper, carper, faultfinder
نقاقة naqqāqa frog
نقيق naqīq croaking, croak; cackling, cackle
 نقب naqaba u (naqb) to bore, pierce, perforate, breach (ھ s.th.), make a hole or breach (ھ in), punch or drill a hole (ھ through); to dig, dig up, dig out, excavate, hollow out (ھ s.th.); to traverse (في a country), pass, travel (في through); to inquire, ask, look, search (عن for), examine thoroughly, investigate, explore, search into, delve into; -- naqiba a (naqab) to be perforated, be full of holes II to drill (عن for, e.g., for oil); to examine thoroughly, study, investigate (عن s.th.), penetrate, delve, s8&roh (عن into), look, s8&roh (عن for); to travel (في through) III to vie in virtues (ه with s.o.) V to examine, study, investigate (عن s.th.), look, search ( عن for); to veil her face (woman); to be perforated, he full of holes VIII to put on a veil, veil one’s face
نقب naqb digging, excavation; piercing, perforation; -- (pl. انقاب anqāb, نقاب niqāb) hole, opening, breach; boring, bore; tunnel
نقاب naqqāb punch
نقاب niqāb pl. نقب nuqub, انقبة anqiba veil │ عن النقاب كشف to uncover, reveal, disclose s.th.
نقابة niqāba pl. -āt cooperative society; union, association, guild; corporation; syndicate; trade union, labor union │ نقابة العمال n. al-‘ummāl trade-union, labor union
نقابي niqābī cooperative; syndicalistic; syndicalist; trade-unionist
نقابية niqābīya syndicalism; trade- unionism
نقيب naqīb pl. نقباء nuqabā’  leader, head, headman; director, principal, chief; chairman of a guild; president; syndic, corporation lawyer; (mil.) captain (army), lieutenant (navy) (Eg. 1939 and U.A.R.); tongue of a balance │ األشراف نقيب head of
 the Alids, head of the descendants of the Prophet
نقيبة naqība pl. نقائب naqā’ib  soul, spirit, mind, intellect; natural disposition, nature, temper, character
منقب manqib, minqab and منقبة manqaba pl. مناقب manāqib  mountain trail, defile, pass
منقب minqab and منقبة minqaba punch, perforator, drill; lancet
مناقب manāqib  virtues, outstanding traits; glorious deeds, facts, exploits
تنقيب tanqīb pl. -āt drilling (esp., for oil); digging, excavation; investigation, examination, inquiry, search, exploration, research
منقب munaqqib investigator, researcher, scholar, explorer
  النقب an-naqab Negev (desert region in S Israel)
نقح naqaḥa a (naqḥ) to prune, lop (ھ a tree), trim, clip (ھ s.th.) II do.; to review, revile, read over carefully, correct (ھ a writing), improve, polish, refine (the style) IV to check, go over, re-examine, revise, correct (ھ s.th.)
تنقيح tanqīḥ checking, (re-)examination; revision; correction 989
نقد naqada u (naqd) to pay in cash (ه ھ to s.o. s.th.); to peck (ھ at); to examine critically (ھ s.th.); to criticize (على ھ s.o. for) III to call to account (ه s.o.) IV to pay (ه ھ to
s.o. s.th.) VIII to criticize (ھ s.th.), find fault (ھ with), take exception (ھ to), disapprove (ھ of); to show up the shortcomings (على of s.o.), criticize (على s.o.); to receive payment in cash
نقد naqd criticism; -- (pl. نقود nuqūd) cash, ready money; pl. specie, coins, change; نقدا in cash; for cash, cash down │ بالنقد in cash; for cash, cash down; النقد ورق waraq an-n. banknotes, paper money; النقود حافظة change purse
نقدي naqdī monetary, pecuniary; numismatic, of coin; cash (adj.) │ تضخم نقدي (taḍakkum) inflation; نقدي جزاء (jazā’) a monetary fine
نقدية naqdīya ready money, cash
نقاد naqqād critic; reviewer
نقادة naqqāda captious critic, caviler, carper
منقد manqad (eg.) brazier
منقاد minqād pl. مناقيد manāqīd  beak, bill (of a bird)
انتقاد intiqād pl. -āt objection, exception; criticism, censure, reproof, disapproval; review, critique
نقدة nuqqād, نقاد -ūn, pl. nāqid ناقد
naqada critic
منتقد muntaqid critic
منتقد muntaqad blameworthy, reprehensible, objectionable, exceptionable
نقذ naqada u (naqd) to deliver, save, rescue (من ه s.o. from); -- naqida a (naqad) to be saved, be rescued, save o.s., escape IV to deliver, save, rescue (ه من s.o. from); to salvage, recover (ھ s.th.) X = IV
انقاذ inqād deliverance, salvation, saving, rescue; salvaging, recovery; relief
استنقاذ istinqād deliverance, salvation, saving, rescue; salvaging, recovery; relief
منقذ munqid rescuer, savior, deliverer
نقر naqara u (naqr) to dig; to pierce, bore, hollow out, excavate (ھ s.th.), make a cavity or hole (ھ in); to cut, carve (ھ s.th., esp., atone or wood); to engrave, inscribe ( في in); to peck up (ھ a grain; of a bird); to peck (ه at s.o.); to strike, bang, knock, rap (على at, on); to drum (ھ on s.th.); to snap one’s fingers; to offend, annoy, vex, hurt, insult, revile, malign, defame (ه s.o.), cast a slur (ه on s.o.), make insinuations (ه against s.o.); to investigate, examine (عن s.th.); -- naqira a (naqar) to be offended, annoyed, miffed (على at) II to peck, peck up (ھ s.th.); to investigate, examine (عن s.th.) III to have an argument, to quarrel, wrangle, bicker (ه with s.o.)
نقر naqr excavation, hollowing out, carving out, engraving; hollow, cavity, hole; snap(ping) of the fingers
نقر naqir annoyed, offended, hurt, miffed
 نقرة naqra pl. naqarāt blow, knock, bang, rap; drumbeat; pluck(ing) (of strings)
نقرة nuqra pl. نقر nuqar, نقار niqār pit, hollow, cavity, hole; depression; orbit, eye socket; neck furrow, nape
نقرة niqra bickering, wrangle, argument, quarrel
نقار naqqār carver, engraver │ نقار الخشب n. al-kašab woodpecker (zool.)
نقارية nuqqārīya pl. -āt (eg.) a percussion instrument resembling a kettledrum
نقير naqīr tiny spot on a date pit; an utterly worthless thing │ نقير شروى يجدي ال ٠٩٩ lā yujdī šarwā n. it won’t help the least bit, it won’t get you anywhere at all; نقير شروى يملك ال he has absolutely nothing, he hasn’t got a red cent to his
name; ...}’ ":I~ J,:i ":I nothing at an, not
the l.	t little bit
;~ naqlra pl. ;W naq<!",.a corvette
;~W naqqara sman drum having a hemispheric body of copper or wood
~,,;~ niiqUr pl. .;:il; naWliqlr’
(Koranic)
a wind instrument
;~~ naqilra (eg.) prattle, idle talk,























rigmarole
~LA:.. m,nqar pl. .;:il:.. manclqlr’
beak.
bill (of a bird); pickax
;.)L:... mutuiqara bickering, wrangle, argument, quarrel
;;~ tuiq,ra pl. ;s.,; naWliq,r’ bickering, wrangle, argument, quarrel; misfortune, calamity
نقرزان naqrazān (eg.) small drum; drummer
نقرس niqris gout; skilled and experienced (physician)
نقريس niqrīs skilled and experienced (physician)
نقز naqaza u i (naqz, نقاز niqāz, نقزان naqazān) to bound, leap, skip, hop II to rock, dandle (ه a child)
نقزة naqza jump, leap, start
ناقوس nāqūs pl. نواقيس nawāqīs  (church)bell; gong; hand bell (used, e.g., in Coptic liturgy); bell jar, globe
 نقش naqaša u (naqš) to variegate, dapple, make many-colored, daub with various colors, bedaub (ھ s.th.); to paint; to chisel, sculpture, carve out; to engrave (ھ s.th., على on, in) II to paint; to engrave; to sculpture III to argue, dispute (ه with s.o.); to discuss (ھ s.th.); to debate (ھ a question); to criticize (ھ s.th.), object, raise an objection (ھ to), raise a protest (ھ against); to bear, examine, interrogate (ه s.o.; jur.) VI to carry on a dispute, to debate (في about) VIII to extract, pull out ( ھ a prick or thorn)
نقش naqš pl. نقوش nuqūš painting, picture, drawing; engraving; inscription; sculpture, figure
نقاش naqqāš painter; house painter; artist; sculptor
نقاشة niqāša (art of) painting or sculpture
منقش minqaš pl. مناقش manāqiš  chisel منقاش minqāš pl. مناقيش manāqīš  chisel مناقشة munāqaša argument, controversy, dispute, debate, discussion;
contestation, opposition, objection, protest
نقاش niqāš argument, controversy, dispute, debate, discussion
منقوش manqūš colored, dappled, variegated; painted; engraved; sculptured; inscribed
مناقش munāqiš opponent in a dispute; disputant
نقص naqaṣa u (naqṣ, نقصان nuqṣān) to decrease, become less, diminish, be diminished, be reduced (ھ by an amount; of a number); to decrease, diminish, lessen, reduce, impair (ھ s.th.), prejudice ( ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), be prejudicial (ه ھ، to), detract (ه ھ، from); to lower, peg down (ھ s.th.); to be deficient, lacking, incomplete, insufficient, inadequate, defective, faulty, imperfect; الشيء نقصه (šai’u) he lacked, needed the thing, was in want of the thing; to fan short (عن of), be less, be lower (عن than) │ 13 واحدا شھرا تنقص عاما (‘āman, šahran) 13 years minus one month II and IV to decrease, diminish, lessen (ھ s.th.); to reduce, lower, peg down (ھ s.th.); to curtail, cut (ھ s.th.) III to invite bids (ھ
for a project, 991 etc., so as to determine the lowest bidder) VI to decrease gradually, diminish slowly, grow less or smaller by degrees VIII to decrease, diminish, become less; to wane; to impair, diminish, lessen (ھ s.th.) │ قدره من انتقص (qadrihī) to disparage s.o., detract from s.o., degrade s.o. X to ask for a reduction ( ھ of s.th.); to find (ھ s.th.) decreased, deficient, short, defective, imperfect, inferior; to discover the absence (ھ of), miss (ھ s.th.)
نقص naqṣ decrease, diminution; deficit, loss, damage; wantage, lack, want, shortage (في of); gap, blank, omission; defect, shortcoming, failing, fault, blemish; deficiency, imperfection, inferiority │ المواليد نقص falling birth rate; نقص مركب murakkab n. inferiority complex
naqṣ نقص = nuqṣān نقصان
naqā’iṣ  نقائص pl. naqīṣa نقيصة
shortcoming, failing, fault, defect
تنقيص tanqīṣ diminution, lessening, decrease, reduction, lowering
مناقصة munāqaṣa pl. -āt competition to determine the lowest bidder, public invitation to submit bide (for public works), notice to bidders; award of contract to the lowest bidder
انقاص inqāṣ diminution, lessening, decrease, reduction, lowering, curtailment
تناقص tanāquṣ decrease, diminution, decrement
انتقاص intiqāṣ impairment, lessening
ناقص nāqiṣ pl. نقص nuqqaṣ decreasing, diminishing; diminished, lowered, decreased, reduced; faulty, defective; deficient, lacking, imperfect, incomplete; short of supply, scarce; less (عن than); growing lighter; defective (gram.)
منقوص manqūṣ deficient, incomplete; insufficient, inadequate
نقض naqaḍa u (naqḍ) to destroy, demolish, tear down, wreak, raze (ھ s.th.); to tear apart, take apart, undo (ھ s.th.); to break, violate, infringe (ھ s.th., esp., a contract or similar legal obligation); to cancel, abolish, repeal, abrogate, revoke, nullify, declare void, annul (ھ s.th.); to invalidate,
 refute (ھ a suspicion); to quash, rescind, reverse (ھ a sentence) │ الوالء نقض (walā’) to renounce allegiance, to revolt; ينقض ال yunqaḍu irrefutable; incontestable, irrevocable III to be in disagreement (ھ with), be contradictory, contrary, opposite (ھ to), contradict (ھ s.th.), be incompatible, inconsistent (ھ with) V to be destroyed, be demolished, be tom down, be wrecked, be razed; to be broken, be violated; to be undone; to disintegrate, decay, fall down, break down, collapse; to disappear, wear off, fade away, die away VI to contradict each other; to be mutually exclusive VIII = V; to rise, mutiny, rebel, revolt (على against); to attack (على s.o.), take the field, go to war (على against s.o.)
نقض naqḍ destruction, demolition; breach, violation, infringement; infraction, offense; refutation, invalidation; veto (pol.); contradiction, logical incompatibility │ الحكم نقض n. al-ḥukm reversal of a sentence; السالم نقض n. as- salām breach of the peace; النقض محكمة واإلبرام maḥkamat an-n. wa-l-ibrām Court of Cassation (Eg.); نقضه يجوز ال (yajūzu) (it is) no longer open to an appeal, incapable of revision, irrevisable, legally valid, final (sentence); النقض حق ḥaqq an-n. right of veto
انقاض anqāḍ (pl. of نقض nuqḍ) debris; rubble
نقيض naqīḍ opposed, opposite, contrary, antithetical, contradictory; antithesis, opposition, contrast, opposite │ نقيض على contrary to, in opposition to, in contradistinction to, unlike; النقيض على on the 992 contrary; نقيضه الى النقيض من انتقل (intaqala) to go from one extreme to the other, move in extremes
نقيضة naqīḍa pl. نقائض naqā’iḍ  polemic poem; contrast
مناقضة munāqaḍa sharp contrast, contradiction; opposition; contestation of a right
تناقض tanāquḍ mutual contradiction, incompatibility; inconsistency, contrariety
انتقاض intiqāḍ collapse, breakdown; uprising, revolt, rebellion
منقوض manqūḍ destroyed, demolished, wrecked; broken, violated; undone, repealed, abrogated, annulled; refutable, disprovable
مناقض munāqiḍ contradictory, contrary, incompatible, inconsistent │ ذاته مناقض (dātahū) self-contradictory
مناقض mutanāqiḍ mutually contradicting, contradictory, conflicting, mutually incompatible; pl. متناقضات contrasts, contrarieties, contradictions, oppositions
نقط naqaṭa u (naqṭ) to point, provide with diacritical points (ھ a letter) II do.; to spot, dot, dab, stain, speckle (ھ s.th.); to fall in drops, drip; to cause (ھ s.th.) to drip, let (ھ s.th.) fall in drops, drop (ھ s.th.); to distribute (ب or ھ s.th.) as a present (على to s.o.); to give a wedding present (la to the bride)
نقطة nuqṭa pl. نقط nuqaṭ, نقاط niqāṭ point, dot; diacritical point; period, full stop; drop; jot, title, speck; trifle, tiny piece; part (esp., of motors, of machines); matter, affair, subject, point; detail, particular; item; spot, location, site; place, village, hamlet, market town
(geogr.); branch, post (adm.); base, position, outpost (mil.); (eg.) wedding present; النقطتان colon (typ.) │ االتصال نقطة
n. al-ittiṣāl junction (of traffic lanes); O االرتكاز نقط fortified position, pocket of resistance (mil.); O اساسية نقطة (asāsīya) key position; االستفھام نقطة interrogation mark; االطفاء نقطة n. al-iṭfā’ or المطافئ نقطة fire station; البوليس نقطة police station, station house; التحول نقطة n. at-taḥawwul turning point, turn of events, turn of the tide; التشحيم نقطة grease nipples (of motors); جمركية نقطة (gumrukīya) customs station, customhouse; O خارجية نقطة (kārijīya) outpost; الذنب نقطة n. ad-danab aphelion (astron.); الرأس نقطة n. ar-ra’s perihelion (astron.); العنبر نقطة n. al-‘anbar mole; beauty spot; العين نقطة n. al-‘ain leucoma (med.); O القتال نقطة combat area, zone of action; النقطة داء epilepsy; بالنقط فوز (fauz) victory on points (in sports)
نقوط nuqūṭ (syr., eg.) wedding present to the bride
 نقيطة nuqaiṭa droplet
نقاطة naqqāṭa dropping tube, dropper, pipette
منقوط manqūṭ having one (diacritical) point; pointed, having (diacritical) points; spotted, dotted, speckled │ منقوطة فصلة (faṣla) semicolon
منقط munaqqaṭ pointed, having (diacritical) points; spotted, dotted, speckled
نقع naqa‘a a (naq‘) to soak, steep (ھ فى s.th. in); to infuse, brew (ھ tea, etc.); to slake, quench (ھ thirst); to stagnate, be stagnant, gather in a pool (water) IV to soak, macerate (ھ s.th. in a liquid); to slake, quench (ھ thirst) X to stagnate, be stagnant; to become impure and foul by stagnation (water); to be swampy (ground)
نقع naq‘ maceration, soaking, steeping; infusion; (pl. انقع anqu‘) stagnant water, quagmire, swamp, bog; (pl. نقاع niqā‘, نقوع nuqū‘) dust 993
نقع nuqā‘a infusion
O نقاعيات nuqā‘īyāt infusoria
نقيع naqī‘ infusion; that with which s.th. is soaked or permeated; (eg.) juice obtained from dried fruits soaked in water
نقوع naqū‘ dried fruit, dried apricots
منقع manqa‘ pl. مناقع manāqi‘  quagmire, swamp, bog;, sump, place where water gathers │ الدم منقع m. ad-dam place of execution
منقوع manqū‘ macerated, soaked; infusion
مستنقع mustanqa‘ pl. -āt quagmire, swamp, bog; moor, morass, marsh, fen │ المستنقعات حمى ḥummā l-m. swamp fever, malaria
نقف naqf, niqf chick
نقل naqala u (naql) to move from its place, move away, displace (ھ s.th.); to remove, take away, carry away, carry, transport ( ھ الى s.th. to); to transfer, transplant, shift, translocate, relocate (ه الى، ... من ھ s.o., s.th. from ... to); to transmit, convey, communicate, bring, deliver, make overt pass on, hand over (ه الى s.th. to s.o.); to
remove, dismiss (ه s.o.); to move, remove (الى to); to copy (من from); to translate ( من الى ... from one language into the other); to hand down, pass on, report, relate (ھ الى s.th. to s.o., عن from, or baaed. on, s.o. or a source); to quote (عن an author or a literary work); to render (ھ a text); to enter, post (ھ an item; in bookkeeping); to communicate, spread (ھ الى a disease to s.o.), infect (الى ھ s.o. with); to transfer, assign, convey, cede (ھ الى s.th., esp. a right, to s.o.) II to move, move away, displace, move on, move forward, advance, transport, move about, let wander, let roam (ھ s.th., esp., a great deal of s.th. or a great number of things, s.th. successively, one thing after the other) │ خطاه نقل (kuṭāhu) to stride along, move along III to exchange (ه ھ with s.o. words); to cast, shoot (ه ھ at s.o. glances); to report (ه ھ to s.o., s.th.), inform (ه ھ s.o. of); to hand, pass (ه ھ to s.o. s.th.) V to be carried, be carried away, be removed, be transported; to be transferred, be conveyed, be assigned; O to be transmitted (by radio); to shift, change its locality; to change one’s residence, remove, go elsewhere; to change position (mil.); to move about; to walk about; to rove, roam, migrate, wander, travel about
│ البالغة منازل في تناقل (m. al-balāga) to be versed in rhetoric VI to carry, transport (ھ s.th.); to report to one another, relate or tell each other (ھ s.th.); to exchange (ھ s.th.); to spread, report, relate (ھ a story, etc.), pass on, hand down (ھ s.th.); to spread by word of mouth (ھ s.th.) │ تناقلته األلسن (alsun) to pass from mouth to mouth, be on everybody’s lips, be the talk of the town; األيدي تناقلته (aidī) to pass from hand to hand, change hands; الجرائد تناقلت الخبر (kabara) the report was taken up by the entire press; الكالم تناقل (kalama) to talk with one another, have a talk VIII to be carried, be carried away, be removed, be transported; to be transferred, be conveyed, be assigned; O to be transmitted (by radio); to shift, change its locality; to change one’s residence, remove, go elsewhere; to change position (mil.); to walk about; to rove, roam, migrate, wander, travel about; to be transferred (official); to be turned over, be
 delivered, be transferred (ship); to be communicated (disease), spread (الى to); to be spread, circulate, make the rounds (rumor); to be transplanted (الى into or to); to move, move along, travel; 994 to betake o.s., proceed, go, take the road (الى to). head (الى for), turn (الى to); to apply o.s., turn (الى to a field of interest); to turn, make a turn (الى into another street; of an automobile); to pass (من from one owner الى to the other); O to be propagated, spread (waves, etc.; الى to, occasionally also في); O to jump across (el. spark); to shift (from attack to defense); to go away, depart (من and عن from), leave a place (من and عن); to go around (في in or among), make the round (في of), visit (one after the other) │ الى به انتقل to shift, translocate, relocate s.th. to; ﷲ رحمة الى انتقل (raḥmati llāh) lit.: to pass away into God’s mercy, i.e., to die; ربه جوار الى انتقل (j. rabbihī) lit.: to be transferred into the presence of the Lord, i.e., to die, pass away
نقل naql carrying, carriage; conveyance, transportation, transport; removal; translocation, relocation, transplantation; transfer (also, e.g., of an official); change of residence, move, remove; transmission (also by radio); translation; transcription, transcript, copy; tradition; report, account; entry, posting (in an account book); conveyance, transfer, assignment, cession
│ عن نقال based on, according to; الدم نقل n. ad-dam and الدماء نقل blood transfusion; O بالالسلكي الصور نقل n. aṣ-ṣuwar bi-l-lā-silkī radio-photography; ميكانيكي نقل motor transport (of passengers and cargoes); اجرة النقل ujrat an-n. cartage, carriage, freight; النقل سيارة sayyārat an-n. truck, lorry; معالم النقل transfer fees, assignment fees; وسائل النقل means of transportation, conveyances
نقلي naqlī traditionary, traditional; of or pertaining to transportation, transport- (in compounds) │ نقلية سيارة (sayyāra) truck, lorry
نقليات naqlīyāt transport services, transportation system, transportation; transports
│ عسكرية نقليات (‘askarīya) troop transports
نقل naql, nuql pl. نقول nuqūl candied almonds or nuts, candy, sweets, dried fruits, etc., as a dessert
نقل naqal rubble, debris
نقلة nuqla migration
نقلة nuqla pl. نقل nuqal gossip; pattern, model
نقال naqqāl portable, transportable
نقالة naqqāla pl. -āt stretcher; ambulance; transport, transport vessel; truck, lorry
نقيل naqīl (yem.) mountain trail, defile, pass
مناقل pl. manqala منقل and manqal منقل
manāqil  brazier
منقلة manqala a day’s march; way station, stopping place; O protractor
تنقل tanaqqul change of locality; change of residence; (mil.) change of position, station or garrison; traveling, roving, roaming, wandering, migration; conveyance, transportation, transport; transmission (radio); transfer; reshuffle, shake-up, reorganization, change of personnel; regrouping, shifting, rearrangement
انتقال intiqāl change of locality; locomotion; change of residence, move, remove, removal; translocation, relocation; transfer; conveyance, transportation, transport; transition (– من الى from -- to); transmission; communication, infection; transit, passage (of the sun through the zodiac); demise, death │ االنتقال طور ṭaur al-int. transition period; االنتقال فترة fatrat al-int. interim period, interim stage, stage of transition; العذراء انتقال عيد ‘īd int. al-‘adrā’ Day of the Assumption of the Virgin (Chr.) 995
transition (‘ahd) عھد انتقالي intiqālī: انتقالي period
ناقل nāqil pl. -ūn, نقلة naqala, نقال nuqqāl carrying; carrier; bearer; translator; copyist; -- conductor (el.) │ السرعة ناقل n. as-sur‘a gear-shift lever (of an automobile)
ناقلة nāqila pl. -āt transport, transport vessel │ البترول ناقلة n. al-betrōl and ناقلة
 troop- ناقلة الجنود tanker; az-zait n. الزيت carrier aircraft ناقلة الطائرات transport; ship,
ناقلية nāqilīya conductivity (el.)
منقول manqūl carried, conveyed, transported; transferred; transmitted; translated; copied, transcribed; movable, mobile, portable; handed down, traditional; traditional stock; (pl. -āt) a movable thing │ منقوالت or (امالك) اموال منقولة movable property, movables, effects, personal property; المنزل منقوالت m. al- manzil household furniture, household effects
متنقل mutanaqqil movable, mobile; portable; ambulant, itinerant, migrant, roving, roaming; nomad; inconstant, changing │ منتقل مستشفى (mustašfā) temporary field hospital, ambulance
منتقل muntaqil ambulatory; movable, mobile; contagious, infectious, communicable │ المنتقلة األعياد the movable feasts; منتقلة علة (‘illa) contagious disease
نقم naqama i (naqm) and naqima a (naqam) to revenge o.s., avenge o.s., take revenge (من on s.o.), take vengeance; to be hostile (على to), be full of rancor or vindictiveness, have a spite, be resentful (على against s.o.), be mad, angry (على at s.o., ھ for, because 00; to hate, loathe, detest (على s.o.); to hold s.th. (ھ) against s.o. (على) VIII to revenge o.s., avenge o.s. take revenge (من on); to take vengeance (ل for)
نقمة naqma revenge, vengeance; rancor, spite, grudge, resentment; misfortune, adversity, punishment, trial, affliction, heavy blow; retribution
نقمة niqma, naqima pl. نقم niqam, نقمات niqamāt revenge, vengeance; rancor, spite, grudge, resentment; misfortune, adversity, punishment, trial, affliction, heavy blow
انتقام intiqām revenge, vengeance
ناقم nāqim avenger; hostile (على to); indignant, angry (على at or about)
منتقم muntaqim avenger; vindictive, revengeful
 نقنق naqnaqa to croak (frog); to cackle, cluck (hen); to gnaw, nibble
 نقانق naqāniq  small mutton sausages (syr.)
نقه naqaha a (نقوه nuqūh) and naqiha a (naqah) to be on the road to recovery, to convalesce; to recover, recuperate (من from) VIII do.
نقه naqah and نقھة naqha recovery, convalescence
نقه naqih recovering, convalescent
نقاھة naqāha recovery, convalescence │ النقاھة دار rest center, convalescent home
ناقه nāqih a convalescent
(نقو and نقي (نقي naqiya a (نقاء naqā’, نقاوة naqāwa, nuqāwa) to be pure II to purify, cleean, cleanse (ھ s.th.); to rid of extraneous matter (ھ s.th.); to &elect, pick out, cull, sift, sort (ھ s.th.); to hand-pick ( ھ s.th.) IV to purify, clean, cleanse (ھ s.th.) VIII to pick out, select (ھ s.th.)
نقاء naqā’ purity
نقاوة naqāwa, nuqāwa purity; O fineness (of a precious metal); selection, culling; elite; pick, best
نقاية nuqāya selection, elite, pick 996 J naqly pl. .W "iqd', .\,.ill aRqiyil" pure, clean, imm&CWate, unstained i
clear,
limpid, free of dirt or .xtraneous matter
~ taRqiya cleaning, cle&lllling, purifl. cation; sifting, BOrting
pun, play on wards; the point of a joke
I
0:::.11 ~l.- quick.witted, quick at repartee
.;,15::; Rakkdt witty; humoroua, piquant;
 mocker, scoffer

.Li:ll ifIJiqij' eel.ction I 0 .Li::l)ll Jo 'Jol'
(q'Ild,a) eel.ctivity (radic)
.;::... m"fIJaqa" eel.cted; eelect
ts:.; Ral:a'a a (s.!ll Rak') to scrape the scab
(. off a wound)
..,.s:.; Ral:aba " (Ra.l:l>, Ral:ab) to make un·
happy, miserabl., aftlict, distress (. s.a.; of fate); to drop (. s.th.); to put (. s.a.) out of favor; - (y~ ""k/lb) to blow sid.ways; to veer, shift (wind); -
(Ra.l:l>,
""k/lb) to d.viate, sw.rv. (.:r from, esp., from a path, road, route, courae) II to avert, divert, deBect, tum away,
remove
(. s.th.) V to d.viate, swerve (. or .:r from); to avoid, shun, eschew (A or .:r s.th.); to refrain (.:r from), steer clear
(.:r of); to take upon one's should....
ta shoulder, take upon o.8., assume (A s.th.) l.:r "'! ..,.s:::; to make s.o. d.viate
or
swerve from
..,.s:.; Ral:b pl. y ~ "dub and ~
Rakba pl. Ral:aMt misfortune, calamity;























disaster, catastrophe
منكب mankib pl. مناكب manākib  shoulder; side, flank; highland, upland │ الھواء بمنكبيه دفع (mankibaihi, hawā’) approx.: to race along, dash along
منكوب mankūb fate-stricken, afflicted with disaster; unhappy, unfortunate, ill- fated, miserable; victim (of a catastrophe)
نكت nakata u (nakt) to scratch up (ھ the ground) II to crack jokes (على about s.o.), poke fun (على at), ridicule (على s.o.)
نكتة nukta pl. نكت nukat, نكات nikāt jot, title, speck, spot; witty remark, witticism, wisecrack, joke; anecdote; pun, play on words; the point of joke │ النكتة حاضر quick-witted, quick at repartee
 نكات nakkāt witty; humorous, piquant; mocker, scoffer
تنكيت tankīt chaffing, legpulling; teasing, banter, raillery, mockery; joking, jesting, fun-making
منكت munakkit mocker, scoffer
نكث nakata u i (nakt) to break, violate, infringe (ھ a contract or similar legal obligation)
VIII to be broken, be violated
نكث nakt breach, violation (of a contract, etc.)
ناكث nākit perfidious, faithless, false, disloyal
نكح nakaḥa u i a (نكاح nikāḥ) to marry (ھا a woman), get married (ھا with) III to become related by marriage (ه to s.o.) IV to give in marriage (ه ھا to s.o. a girl)
نكاح nikāḥ marriage; marriage contract; matrimony, wedlock
مناكح manākiḥ  (pl.) women
نكد nakida a (nakad) to be hard, harsh, difficult; to be unhappy, miserable; -- nakada u (nakd) to give little (ه to s.o.); to torment, pester, molest (ه s.o.) II to make life hard, difficult, miserable (ه for s.o.), embitter s.o.’s (ه) life III to torment, harass, pester, molest (ه s.o.) V to be made miserable, be embittered (life)
نكد nakd pl. انكاد ankād misfortune; hardship, adversity; molestation, trouble, nuisance; worry, concern │ الطالع نكد misfortune
نكد nakid pl. انكاد ankād, مناكيد manākīd  hard, troublesome, laborious; unhappy; peevish, cross, bad-tempered
انكد ankad  troublesome, painful, excruciating 997
مناكدة munākada pl. -āt inconvenience, discomfort, trouble, burden
منكود mankūd unhappy, unfortunate; ill- fated │ الحظ منكود m. al-ḥaẓẓ pl. الحظ مناكيد manākīd al-ḥ. ill-starred, unlucky, unfortunate
نكر nakira u (nakar, nukr, نكور nukūr, نكير nakīr) not to know (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), have no knowledge, be ignorant (ھ of s.th.); to deny, disown, disavow, renege (ھ s.th.) II
to disguise, mask (ه s.o.); to use in its indefinite form (ھ a noun; gram.) III to disapprove (ه of s.o.), reject (ه هs.o.) IV to pretend not to know (ه s.o.), refuse to have anything to do (ه ھ، with s.o., with s.th.); to refuse to acknowledge, disown, disavow, disclaim, deny (ھ s.th.); to renounce, renege (ھ s.th.); to refuse, deny (ھ على s.th. to s.o.), dispute, contest (ھ على s.th. of s.o.); to reject (ھ على s.th. with regard to s.o.), disapprove (ھ على of s.th. with regard to s.o.); to censure, blame, rebuke (ه على s.o. for), criticize (ھ من s.th. in s.o.); to hold s.th. (ھ) against s.o. (على), reproach (على ھ s.o. for) │ ذاته انكر (dātahū) to deny o.s. ; نفسه انكر (nafsahū) to harbor self-doubts; اراه اني انكرت I pretended not to see him V to be in disguise, be disguised, disguise o.s.; to change for the worse, change beyond recognition; to become estranged, be alienated (ل from s.th.); to .nub (ل s.o.), treat (ل s.o.) with hostility, deal ungraciously (ل with s.o.); to deny o.s. (ل, e.g., a feeling), shut out from one’s heart ( ل s.th.) VI to have no knowledge, be ignorant (ھ of s.th.); to pretend not to know (ھ s.th.), feign ignorance, make as if one doesn’t know; to refuse to have anything to do (ه with), snub, cut, ignore, pretend not to know (ه s.o.) X not to know (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), have no knowledge, be ignorant (ھ of s.th.); to disapprove (ھ of s.th.), reject (ھ s.th,); to detect, loathe (ھ s.th.)
نكر nukr denial, disavowal
نكر nakir unknown, little known
نكرة nakira indefinite noun (gram.); unknown person
lā ال نكران │ denial nukrān نكران نكران الجميل incontestable; is it nukrāna self-denial نكران الذات ingratitude;
نكير nakīr denial, disavowal; disapproval, rejection; negation; reprehensible, repugnant, disgusting, vile, revolting, loathsome, abominable, atrocious; one of the Angels of Death (see النكير عليه شد │ (منكر (šadda) to reproach
s.o. severely
nakrā’ نكراء f. ankar , انكر
reprehensible, abominable, disgusting,
 vile, revolting, loathsome │ نكراء ابتسامة
vicious smile
انكار inkār denial, disavowal, negation, contestation; refusal, rejection, non- acceptance │ الذات انكار self-denial, selflessness, unselfishness; لجميله انكار (li- jamīlihī) ingratitude toward s.o.
انكاري inkārī denying, disaffirmative; negative
تنكر tanakkur disguise, masquerade │ التنكر محفل maḥfil at-t. fancy-dress party, costume ball
تنكري tanakkurī: تنكري حفل (ḥafl) masked ball, costume ball
استنكار istinkār disapproval; horror, aversion, loathing
ناكر nākir denying, disavowing; unfriendly, hostile, forbidding │ الجميل ناكر ungrateful
منكر munakkar indeterminate; indefinite (gram.)
منكر munkar denied; not recognized, unacknowledged, disowned, disavowed, disclaimed; disagreeable, shocking, detestable, abominable; abomination, atrocity; pl. منكرات objectionable, forbidden, 998 or reprehensible, actions │ ونكير منكر the two angels who examine the dead in their graves as to their faith
متنكر mutanakkir disguised, in disguise; incognito │ متنكر رقص (raqṣ) masked ball, costume ball
مستنكر mustankar objectionable, reprehensible; odd, strange
نكز nakaza u (nakz) to prick; to goad, egg on (ه s.o.)
نكس nakasa u (naks) to turn around, turn over, invert, reverse, turn upside down
(ھ s.th.); to lower, withdraw, retract, pull in (ھ s.th.); to bow, bend, tilt (رأسه
ra’sahū or برأسه one’s head); to cause a relapse (ھ of an illness); pass. nukisa, to suffer a relapse II = I; to hang at half-mast (ھ a flag) VIII to be turned over, be inverted, be reversed; to sink, drop forward (head); to relapse, suffer a relapse
نكس nuks and نكسة naksa relapse; degeneration, degeneracy; decadence
تنكس tanakkus degeneration (biol.)
انتكاس intikās relapse
منكوس mankūs inverted, reversed; relapsing, suffering a relapse
منكس munakkas inverted, reversed │ الرأس منكس m. ar-ra’s with bowed head
منتكس muntakis relapsing, suffering a relapse
نكش nakaša i a (nakš) to clear out, dredge, clean (ھ s.th., esp., a well); to stir up, rout up, turn up, hoe up, rake up, dig up, break (ھ the ground); to rummage, ransack, search (ھ s.th.); to disorder, ruffle, tousle, dishevel (ھ s.th.); to shake (ھ trees)
منكش minkaš pl. مناكش manākiš hoe, mattock; rake
منكاش minkāš pl. مناكيش manākīš  O dredger; poker, fire iron; (eg.) pickax
نكص nakaṣa i u (nakṣ, نكوص nukūṣ, منكص mankaṣ) to withdraw, turn away (عن from); to recoil, shrink (عن from) │ نكص عقبيه على (‘aqibaihi) to retreat, climb down, give up one’s intention II to cause ( ه s.o.) to retreat VIII to fall back, recoil, retreat
نكف nakafa u (nakf) to stop, arrest (ھ s.th.); to disdain, scorn, spurn (عن s.th.); to
reject (عن s.th.) │ ينكف ال (yunkafu) irresistible, resistles8; immeasurable, unfathomable III to vex, annoy, trouble, pester, harass, torment (ه s.o., ھ with) X to be proud, haughty; to disdain, scorn, spurn, reject (عن or من s.th.), look down upon (عن or من), have an aversion (عن or من to), loathe, detest (عن or من s.th., also ھ); to refrain (ان from doing s.th.)
نكفة nakafa parotid gland
نكفي nakafī parotid (adj.) │ الغدة التھاب النكفية (gudda) inflammation of the parotid gland, parotitis, mumps (med.)
نكاف nukāf O parotitis, mumps (med.)
 نكل nakala i u (نكول nukūl) and nakila a (nakal) to recoil, shrink (من or عن from), flinch, shirk (من or عن s.th.), desist, refrain, abstain, draw back, withdraw (من
 or عن from); -- nakala (نكلة nakla) and II to make an example (ب of s.o.), punish severely (ب s.o.), teach s.o. (ب) a lesson; to maltreat, torture (ب s.o.) II and IV to repel, force back, drive back, hold off, deter (ه عن s.o. from)
نكل nikl pl. انكال ankāl, نكول nukūl fetter, shackle, chain; bit (of a bridle)
نكال nakāl exemplary punishment, warning example, warning
نكول nukūl refusal to testify in court (Isl. Law)
تنكيل tankīl exemplary punishment; forcing back, driving back. containment; maltreatment, torture 999
 نكل nikl nickel
نكه nakaha i u (nakh) to blow, breathe (على or
ل in s.o.’s face)
نكھة nakha smell of the breath; fragrance, smell, scent, aroma
نكى nakā i (نكاية nihāya) to cause damage, to harm; to hurt, injure (في or ه s.o.); to vex, annoy, offend (ب s.o.)
نكاية nikāya wrong, harm, damage, prejudice; vexation, annoyance, grievance, offense, outrage, chicanery │ فيه نكاية nikāyatan fīhi in defiance of him, to spite him; النكاية فيه اغلظ (aglaẓa, nikāya) to beset
s.o. grievously, ride roughshod over s.o.
انكى ankā worse; causing more damage, more harmful, hurting or offending more grievously
 نم namma u i (namm) to betray, reveal, disclose, bespeak, indicate, show (على or عن s.th.); to give evidence (عن of s.th.); to report in a libelous manner (ھ على s.th. about s.o.), sow dissension (بين among or between)
نم namm slander, calumniation, calumny; (pl. -ūn, انماء animmā’ ) talebearer, scandalmonger, slanderer, calumniator
نمة nimma louse
نمام nammām (eg.) a variety of mint (Mentha sativa L.; bot.)
نمام nammām slanderer, calumniator
نميمة namīma pl. نمائم namā’im  slander, defamation, calumny
نامة nāmma stir, bustle, life
 نمي nummī pl. -āt coin │ النميات علم ‘ilm an-n. numismatics
نموذج look up alphabetically
 نمر V to become angry, furious (ل with s.o.), turn into a tiger; to bluster, swagger
anmār انمار numur, نمر pl. namir نمر
leopard; tiger
نمر namir clean, pure, healthy, wholesome (esp., water)
نمرة namira leopardess; tigress
نمرة numra pl. نمر numar speck, spot
نمر pl. namrā’ , نمراء f. anmar , انمر
numr spotted, striped, brindled
منمر munammar spotted, striped, brindled
  نمر II to mark with numbers, to number, provide with a number (ھ s.th.)
نمرة numra, nimra pl. نمر numar, nimar
number, numero; figure │ واحد نمرة nimrat
w. first-class, first-rate, A-1, excellent
نمارة nammāra pl. -āt numberer, numbering machine, date stamp
تنمير tanmīr numbering, numeration, count
منمر munammar numbered, counted
نمرسي numrusī pl. نمارسة namārisa (eg.) chinaware dealer
نمرق numruq and نمرقة numruqa pl. نمارق namāriq  cushion, pad; pillow; panel, saddle pad
نمس namasa i (nams) to keep secret, hide, conceal (ھ s.th.); to confide a secret (ه to s.o.), confide in s.o. (ه), let (ه s.o.) in on a secret, make (ه s.o.) one’s confidant III to confide a secret (ه to s.o.)
نمس nims (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. نموس numūs ichneumon, mongoose; ferret, marten, weasel
ناموس nāmūs pl. نواميس nawāmīs  sly, cunning, wily; confidant; (coll.; n. un. ة) mosquito(es); see also alphabetically │ األكبر الناموس the Archangel Gabriel
 ناموسية nāmūsīya mosquito net 1000
نمسا nimsā, النمسا an-nimsā Austria
نمساوي nimsāwī Austrian (adj. and n.)
نمش namiša a (namaš) to be freckled, have freckles
نمش namaš (cols.; n. un. ة) freckles; discolored spots on the skin
نمش namiš freckled
نمش pl. namšā’ , نمشاء f. anmaš , انمش
numš freckled
نمط namaṭ pl. نماط nimāṭ, انماط anmāṭ way, manner, mode, fashion; form, shape; sort, kind │ نمط على in the manner of; ھذا على النمط in this manner, this way, after this fashion; النمط حديث new-fashioned, modem; النمط عتيق old-fashioned, outmoded; على ھم واحد نمط they are of the same stamp, they are all alike
نمطي namaṭ formal, rigid, stiff
نمق II to embellish, decorate, ornament, adorn (ھ s.th.); to write in an elegant, lofty style (ھ s.th.); to compose (ھ a text)
تنميق tanmīq ornamentation, embellishment; glorification, exaltation, ago grandizement; elaborate embellishment (with figures of speech); composition (of a text, in elegant style)
منمق munammaq adorned, embellished; elegant, in good style, ornate, flowery (text, language)
نمل namila a (namal) to tingle, prickle, be numb, be benumbed (a limb)
نمل naml (cols.; n. un. ة) pl. نمال nimāl
ant
نمل namlī antlike; ant- (in compounds); formic
نملية namlīya meat safe, food safe
نمل namal itching, tickling sensation; tingle, prickle, pricking sensation
نمل namil creeping, crawling; teeming with ants; nimble, deft
نمل anmula pl. انامل anāmil  fingertip
تنميل tanmīl itching, tickling sensation; tingle, prickle, pricking sensation
منمول manmūl teeming with ants
نمنم namnama to stripe, streak (ھ s.th.); to adorn, embellish, ornament (ھ s.th.)
نمنم nimnim streaks or ripples in the sand (caused by the wind)
نمنمة namnama, nimnima wren (zoo.)
O منمنمة munamnama miniature
نمو) نما) namā u (نمو numuw) to grow; to increase; to rise
نمو numuw growth; progress
نموذج namūdaj, numūdaj pl. -āt and نماذج namādij  model; type; pattern; sample, specimen; exemplar, example; blank, form
نموذجي namūdajī exemplary, model
نمى namā i (namy, نماء namā, نمية namīya) to grow; to increase, augment, multiply; to rise; to progress, make progress, advance; to thrive, prosper, flourish; to be ascribed, be attributed (الى to s.o.); to ascribe, attribute (ھ الى s.th. to s.o.); to be told, be reported (الى to s.o.; of an event), reach (الى s.o.; news), come to s.o.’s knowledge II and IV to make grow, increase, augment, promote, further, advance (ھ s.th,)VIII to trace one’s origin (الى to s.o.), descend, be descended (الى from), be related (الى to); to be affiliated, be associated, have connections (الى with); to depend, be dependent (الى on); to belong (الى to, esp., to an organization), be a member (الى of an organization)
نماء namā’ growth, expansion, increase, augmentation, increment, accretion
نمي namīy growth, expansion, increase, augmentation, increment, accretion 1001
نماة namāh pl.<<< small louse
تنمية tanmiya expansion, promotion, furtherance, advancement; increase, augmentation; raising, stepping up, intensification, boost
انماء inmā’ expansion, promotion, furtherance, advancement, increase, augmentation; raising, stepping up, intensification, boost; cultivation, breeding (of plants)
انتماء intimā’ membership
نامية nāmiya pl. نوام nawāmin growth; morbid growth, morbid formation,
 excrescence, tumor (med.) │ النوامي السرطانية (saraṭānīya) cancerous formations (med.)
منتم muntamin belonging, pertaining
منتمى muntaman descent, origin, relationship, affiliation. membership
نھب nahaba a u and nahiba a (nahb) to plunder, rifle, take by force (ھ s.th.) │ نھب nahaba l-arḍa and الطريق نھب (ṭarīqa) to cover the distance (الى to) quickly or at tremendous speed IV to let (ه s.o.) rifle (ھ s.th.); to leave, surrender as booty (ه ھ to
s.o. s.th.) VI to grip, seize (ھ the soul, the heart) │ عدوا األرض تناھب (arḍa ‘adwan) to race along at a tearing pace VIII to grip, seize (ھ the soul, the heart); to rifle, snatch away (ھ s.th.); to take in eagerly, devour (ھ s.th.; said of the eyes) │ انتھب الطريق (ṭarīqa) to cover the distance (الى to) quickly or at tremendous speed
نھب nahb robbery, plundering, pillage, looting, spoliation; gallop; (pl. نھاب nihāb) plunder, spoils, booty, loot; نھبا nahban by robbery
نھبة nuhba booty, plunder, spoils, loot نھبى nuhbā booty, plunder, spoils, loot نھاب nahhāb robber; plunderer,
marauder, looter
نھبرة nahbura abyss; hell
نھج nahaja a (nahj) to proceed, act; to enter (ھ upon a road), take (ھ a route or course), follow, pursue (ھ a way, a road); to make clear, clarify (ھ s.th.); to be open, plain, distinct; -- nahaja i and nahija a (nahaj) to be out of breath, gasp for breath, pant │ خطة نھج (kiṭṭatan) to pursue a plan; to assume an attitude; منواله على نھج (minwālihī) to follow s.o.’s example II to put out of breath, make breathless, cause to pant (ه s.o.) IV do.; to be clear (matter, affair); to make clear, clarify, explain (ھ s.th.) VIII to enter (ھ upon a road), take ( ھ a route or course), follow, pursue (ھ a way, a road) │ سبيله انھج (sabīlahū) and X سبيله استنھج to follow s.o.’s example, follow s.o.’s footsteps, imitate s.o.
نھج nahj pl. نھوج nuhūj open way; road; method, procedure, manner │ نھجه نھج (nahjahū) to follow s.o.’s method; النھج
القويم the straight path, the right way, the proper manner
نھج nahaj quick breathing, panting; breathlessness
نھيج nahīj quick breathing, panting; breathlessness
ناھج nāhij open, plain road
منھج manhaj, minhaj pl. مناھج manāhij  open, plain, easy road; manner, procedure, method; program; course │ التعليم منھج curriculum; البحث مناھج m. al-baht  methodology of research, research methods
منھاج minhāj pl. مناھيج manāhīj way, road; method; program
نھد nahada a u (نھود nuhūd) to become round and full, swell (breasts); to be buxom, have round, swelling breasts V to sigh VI to share the expenses; to distribute among each other in equal shares (ھ s.th.) 1002
نھد nahd pl. نھود nuhūd female breast, bosom; elevation, rise, hump, bump
تنھد tanahhud pl. -āt sigh
ناھد nāhid full, round, swelling (breast); in the bloom of youth; buxom
نھر nahara a (nahr) to flow copiously, stream forth, gush forth; to chide, scold, reproach (ه s.o.); to turn away with angry words, brush off, rebuff, reject, repulse, drive away, chase away (ه s.o.) VIII to chide, scold (ه s.o.); to drive away, chase away (ه s.o.)
نھر nahr pl. انھر anhur, انھار anhār, نھور nuhūr, stream, river; -- (pl. anhur and anhār) column (of a newspaper) │ بين ما النھرين (nahrain) Mesopotamia; النھر وراء ما Transoxiana; اردن نھر Eridanus (astron.);
n. urdunn the Jordan river; السالم نھر n. as- salām the Tigris; الشريعة نھر the Jordan river
نھري nahrī river- (in compounds), riverine, fluvial, fluviatile
نھار nahār pl. انھر anhur, نھر nuhur daytime, day (from dawn to dusk, as distinguished from يوم yaum = day of 24 hours) │ وليال نھارا nahāran wa-lailan by day and by night; نھار ليل laila nahāra day
 and night; انھر نھار (anhar) a wonderful day
نھاري nahārī relating to day or daytime, diurnal; نھاريات news of the day, miscellany (heading of a newspaper column)
انھر anhar  see nahr
نھير nahīr copious, ample, abundant, plentiful, much
نھير nuhair pl. -āt little river, creek, brook; a tributary, an affluent
انتھار  intihār rebuke, scolding, reprimand, reproof; rejection, rebuff, repulse, repulsion
نھز nahaza a (nahz) to push, thrust, shove (ه s.o.); to drive, urge on (ه s.o.); to repulse, hold off, ward off (ه s.o.) III to be near s.th. (ھ, esp., fig.), approach, attain, reach (ھ s.th.); to seize (ھ s.th.) │ ناھز البلوغ to attain (the age of) majority; ناھز الخمسين he was close to fifty, he was pushing fifty VIII الفرصة انتھز (al-furṣata) to seize or take the opportunity, take advantage or avail o.s. of the opportunity; ل فرصة ھ انتھز (furṣatan) to use s.th. as an opportunity for
نھزة nuhza opportunity, occasion
نھاز nahhāz: الفرص نھاز n. al-furaṣ quick to seize an opportunity, an opportunist
al-furaṣ int. انتھاز الفرص intihāz: انتھاز
exploitation of opportunities, opportunism انتھاز intihāzī timeserver, opportunist انتھازية intihāzīya opportunism
نھش nahaša i (nahš) to bite, snap, grab with the teeth (ھ s.th.); to tear to pieces, mangle (.s.o.)
نھاش nahhāš snappish, biting, mordacious, sharp
نھض nahaḍa a (nahḍ, نھوض nuhūḍ) to rise, get up (عن from a seat, from bed); to take off, start (airplane); to pounce (الى on s.o., on s.th.); to raise, lift, hoist, heave, carry (ب s.o., s.th.); to carry on, practice, pursue, attack resolutely, tackle. handle, take in one’s hands, further, promote, encourage (ب s.th.), give a boost, give impetus (ب to s.th.), bring new life (ب into
s.th.), bring about an upswing (ب of s.th.); to stand up (ب for), take up the cause of ( ب), espouse, support, endorse, champion ( ب s.th.); to rise, revolt, rebel (على against s.o.); to get ready, prepare (ل for a piece of work, a task, or the like), begin, start, undertake (ل s.th.), enter, embark (ل upon); to be apposite, pertinent, apropos (argument) │ قائما نھض (qā’iman) he got on his 1003 feet, he got up; باألمر نھض (bi- l-amr) to assume power, take the command; ب الحجة نھضت (ḥujja) proof bee been established for …; بالخسائر نھض والضحايا (ḍaḥāyā) to take losses and sacrifices readily upon o.s. III to offer resistance (ه to), resist, oppose, defy (s.o.); to argue, dispute (ه with s.o.) IV to tell (ه s.o.) to rise, lift up, raise, help up (ه s.o.), awaken, (a)rouse, stir up, animate, inspire, stimulate, excite, incite (ه s.o.) VI to get up, stand up, rise, draw o.s. up VIII do. X to awaken, (a)rouse, stimulate, animate, encourage, incite, instigate, egg on (ه s.o., ا لى to)
نھض nahḍ awakening, rise, growth, boom, upswing, advancement, progress
نھضة nahḍa pl. -āt getting up, rising; awakening (esp., national), rise, growth, boom, upswing, advancement, progress; resurgence, revival, rebirth, renaissance; (spiritual) movement; ability, capability, power │ النھضة عيد ‘īd an-n. Day of National Awakening (of Iraq, celebrated on the 9th of Shaban)
نھوض nuhūḍ raising, boosting, revival, restoration, promotion, advancement, furtherance, encouragement, activation (ب of s.th.)
مناھضة munāhaḍa resistance, opposition
انھاض inhāḍ awakening, arousing, stimulation, animation; promotion,. advancement, encouragement, initiation of an upswing, of a boom
استننھاض istinhāḍ awakening, arousing, stimulation, animation; promotion, advancement, encouragement, initiation of an upswing, of a boom
ناھض nāhiḍ rising, getting up; active, diligent, energetic │ ناھض دليل conclusive proof, cogent evidence
 نھق nahaqa, nahiqa a (nahq, نھاق nuhāq, نھيق
nahīq) to bray (donkey)
نھك nahaka a (نھاكة nahāka) to wear off, wear out, use up, consume (ھ s.th.); to grind down, crush (ھ s.th.); -- (nahk) and nahika a (nahk, نھكة nahka) to exhaust, weaken, enfeeble, debilitate, sap the strength of, wear out, wear down, enervate, unnerve, waste, emaciate (ه s.o.); nahika and pass. nuhika to be worn off, worn out, run down, used up, spent, exhausted, enervated, gaunt, emaciated │ عرضه نھك (‘irḍahū) to injure s.o.’s honor IV to exhaust, wear out, enervate, ruin (ه s.o.) VIII to waste, emaciate, enervate, exhaust (ه s.o.); to violate, abuse, defile, profane, desecrate (ھ s.th.); to infringe, violate (ھ a law), offend against (ھ); to rape, ravish (ھا a woman); to insult, defame, malign, slander, abuse, brutalize (ه a man) │ ينتھك ال yuntahaku inviolable, sacrosanct, sacred, consecrated
نھك nallk weakening, exhaustion, enervation, attrition; consumption, depletion, exhaustion; abuse, misuse; infraction, violation; profanation, desecration; sacrilege
نھكة nahka exhaustion; emaciation, wasting away
انھاك inhāk exhaustion
انتھاك intihāk weakening, exhaustion, enervation, attrition; consumption, depletion, exhaustion; abuse, misuse; infraction, violation; profanation, desecration; sacrilege; rape │ الحرمة انتھاك int. al-ḥurma sacrilege: العورة انتھاك int.
al-‘aura offense involving moral turpitude
منھك munhik grueling, exhausting
نھل nahila a (nahal, منھل manhal) to drink
نھلة nahla pl. nahalāt drink, draught, gulp, swallow
منھل manhal pl. منھل manāhil watering place, spring, pool 1004
نھم nahima a (naham, نھامة nahāma) to have a ravenous appetite, be insatiable; to be greedy, covetous (في of)
نھم naham, ravenous appetite, voracity; greed, greediness, avidity
نھمة nahma burning desire, craving, greed, avidity
نھيم nahim greedy, avid; insatiable, voracious; glutton, gourmand
نھيم nahīm greedy, avid; insatiable, voracious; glutton, gourmand
منھوم manhūm greedy, avid; insatiable; covetous, desirous (ب of s.th.)
نھنه nahnaha to restrain, hold back, keep, prevent (عن s.o. from); to sob
نھو) and نھي) نھا nahā u (nahw) and نھى nahā a (nahy) to forbid (عن s.o. s.th., to do s.th.), prohibit, ban (عن s.o. from doing s.th.), interdict, proscribe (ه عن to s.o. s.th.); to restrain, hold back, keep, prevent (عن
s.o. from); pass. نھي nuhiya to come, get ( الى to s.o.; of news), reach (الى s.o.), come to s.o.’s knowledge IV to get (ھ الى s.th. to s.o.), make s.th. (ھ) reach s.o. (الى); to communicate, transmit, make known (ھ الى s.th. to s.o.), bring (ھ s.th.) to s.o.’s (الى) knowledge, inform, apprise (الى ھ s.o. of s.th.); to bring to an end, terminate, finish, end, wind up, conclude, complete (ھ s.th.); to put an end to s.th. (ھ), settle, decide (ھ s.th.) VI to come to an end, run out, expire (period of time); to attain a high degree; to come, get (الى to s.o.), reach (الى s.o.); to desist, refrain, abstain (عن from), give up, renounce, forgo, abandon (عن s.th.), cease, stop (عن doing s.th.) │ اسماعھم الى تناھى (asmā‘ihim) to come to s.o.’s hearing, to s.o.‘s knowledge VIII to be concluded, terminated, finished, done with, settled, decided, be over; to run out, expire, come to an end (appointed time); to end, end up, wind up (ب by, in or with); to finish, terminate, conclude, wind up (عن s.th.), be or become finished, done, be through (ب with s.th.); to wind up, land eventually (الى at), get ultimately (الى to); (with ان الى) to come or lead to the point where ..., end at the point where, get eventually so that ..., result in; to come to s.o.’s (الى) knowledge; to lead, lead up, bring (ب الى s.o. to); to desist, refrain, abstain (عن from s.th.), give up, renounce, forgo, abandon (عن s.th.), cease, stop (عن doing s.th.) │ الى األمر انتھى ان the upshot was that, the long and short of it was that …; ان الى األمر به انتھى he got to the point where ...
 نھي nahy prohibition, ban, interdiction, proscription │ واألمر النھي (amr) unlimited, absolute authority, dictatorial power, command
نھيي nahyī prohibitory, prohibitive, prohibitionary
نھى nuhan intelligence, understanding, reason, mind, intellect
نھية nuhya mind, intellect
نھاء nihā’ utmost degree, limit
نھاية nihāya pl. -āt end; termination, conclusion; outcome, result, upshot; the utmost; limit, utmost degree, extreme, extremity; nihāyatan in the end, at last, finally, ultimately, eventually │ النھاية في in the end, at last, finally, ultimately, eventually; النھاية الى to the end; نھاية بال (bi- lā) unending(ly); نھاية غير الى or نھاية ال ما الى
١ ) لهā nihāyata) unendingly, to infinity, ad infinitum; للنھاية to the greatest extent,
extremely; األرب نھاية n. al-arab the ultimate goal; الصغرى النھاية (ṣugrā) minimum; النھاية العظمى) الكبرى) (kubrā, ‘uẓmā) maximum; العليا النھاية (‘ulyā) the best grade, the highest rating (in a system of school marks); اعلى الكبرى النھاية في درجة (a‘lā darajatin) absolute maximum (of temperature); 1005 درجة اعلى اصغرى النھاية في (aqṣā d.) absolute  minimum; النھاية حد ḥadd an-n. utmost limit, last step; الحذق في نھاية كان (nihāyatan, ḥidq) to be the ne plus ultra of skill, be extremely skillful
نھائي nihā’ī extreme, utmost, last, final; ultimate, eventual; final, decisive, conclusive, definitive; نھائيا at last, finally │ نھائي انذار (indār) or نھائي بالغ (balāg) ultimatum; نھائي حكم (ḥukm) final decision, final judgment (jur.); نھائي عالج extreme remedy, last resource; ي فوز (fauz) ultimate triumph, eventual success; نھائي مباران a final match, final (in sports)
نھائي ال lā-nihā’ī infinite, unending
النھائية lā-nihā’īya infinity
انھاء inhā’ finishing, termination, completion, conclusion; settlement; suspension, stop
تناه tanāhin finity, finitude, limitedness; expiration (of a period of time)
انتھاء intihā’ end, termination, completion, conclusion, close; expiration │ األجل انتھاء int. al-ajal end of life, death
ناه nāhin interdictory, prohibitory, prohibitive │ رجل من ناھيك رجل ھذا (rajulun nāhīka) here is a man to fill any man’s shoes; من ناھيك (also عن or ب) how excellent is! how remarkable is …! suffice it to …! let it be enough to …! to say nothing of ..., not to mention …, let alone ...; above all, in the first place, primarily; take, for
instance, ...! ب ناھيك it is enough to mention
…; بأن ناھيك (bi-an) let it be enough to …; let it suffice you to know that ...; not to mention the fact that ...; to say nothing of the fact that ...; aside from the fact that ...
ناھية nāhiya pl. نواه nawāhin ban, prohibition, proscription
منھي manhīy forbidden, prohibited, interdicted, illicit
متناه matanāhin finished, terminated, expired; limited, bounded, finite; utmost, extreme; excessive, exaggerated │ متناه غير unlimited, boundless, infinite, unending, endless; الدقة في متناه (diqqa) extremely thin, of the greatest fineness; الصغر في متناه (ṣigari) extremely tiny, minute
منته muntahin ceasing, running out; finished, done; expired (validity)
منتھى muntahan finished, terminated; end; the utmost, extreme; highest degree, utmost limit │ الشدة بمنتھى bi-m. š-šidda with extreme force; الدقة منتھى في (m. d-diqqa) extremely thin; منتھاه بلغ to reach its highest degree
نوء) ناء) nā’a u (nau’) to fall down, sink down, break down, collapse, succumb (ب under a burden); to weigh heavily (ب upon s.o.) │ بالحمل ناء (ḥaml) to bear a burden with difficulty; to be weighed down by a burden; بكلكله ناء (bi-kalkalihī) to oppress
s.o. grievously, weigh heavily upon s.o. III to offer resistance (ه to s.o.), resist, oppose, withstand, defy (ه s.o.); to vie, compete (ه with s.o.); to fight, struggle, contend (ه with s.o.) │ العداء ناوأه (‘adā’a) to be hostile to s.o., treat s.o. with hostility IV to weigh down, crush (ه s.o.)
نوء nau’ pl. انواء anwā’, نوآن nau’ān, tempest, storm; gale, hurricane
 مناوأة munāwa’a resistance, opposition, recalcitrance, insubordination; struggle, contention, strife
 نوب) ناب) nāba u (naub, مناب manāb, نيابة niyāba) to represent (عن s.o.), act as representative (عن of s.o.), deputize, substitute (عن for s.o.), act as deputy, substitute, or proxy (عن of s.o.), take s.o.’s (عن) place, replace (عن s.o.), perform s.o.’s (عن) office, act in s.o.’s (عن) behalf; to return from time to time (الى to s.o.), visit periodically (الى s.o.), 1006 frequent ( الى s.o.’s place); -- (naub, نوبة nauba) to afflict, hit, strike, befall (ه s.o.; of misfortune), happen, occur (ه to s.o.), fall to s.o.’s (ه) lot or share, descend (ه upon s.o.) II to appoint (ه s.o.) as deputy or agent (عن of), commission, depute, or delegate (ه s.o.) to act in behalf of (عن) III to take turns, alternate (ه with s.o.) IV to depute, deputize (ه s.o.), commission or delegate (ه s.o.) to act in behalf of (عن), in s.o.’s (عن) place; to empower, authorize (ه s.o.) to act in behalf of (عن); to come from time to time (الى to s.o.), visit frequently ( الى s.o.), frequent (الى s.o.’s place) │ اناب
<I الى to turn repentantly to God VI to take turns, alternate (في or على in, also ھ in some activity), do s.th. (في or على, also ھ) by turns; to visit, befall or afflict (ه s.o.) successively or alternately │ الخطوب تناوبته he has suffered one misfortune after the other VIII to befall, beset, afflict (ه s.o.), happen, occur (ه to s.o.)
نوبة nauba pl. نوب nuwab change, alternation, shift, rotation; (one’s) turn; time, instance (= مرة marra); case, instance, occasion; -- (pl. -āt) fit, attack, paroxysm (path.); crisis; change (or relief) of the guard, guard duty, guard; bugle call; (syr.) troupe of musicians, small orchestra of native instruments │ بالنوبة alternately, in rotation, by turns, successively, one by one, one alter the other; عصبية نوبة (‘aṣabīya) nervous crisis; غضبه نوبات n. gaḍabihī his fits of rage; نوبة قلبية (qalbīya) heart attack; المطر نوبات n. al- maṭar rainy spells, periods of rain; جاءت نوبته it was his turn
نوبتجي naubatjī on duty; commander of the guard, officer on duty
نوبة nauba pl. نوب nuwab misfortune, calamity, mishap, misadventure, accident, reverse, heavy blow
نيابة niyāba representation, replacement, substitution, proxy, deputyship; branch office, branch, agency; delegation; prosecution, office of the district attorney
│ عن نيابة niyābatan ‘an in place of, instead of, in lieu of; بالنيابة acting, deputy, by proxy; بالنيابة المصلحة مدير (mudīr al- maṣlaḥa) the deputy director of the department; عن بالنيابة in the name of, in behalf of; عمومية نيابة (‘umūmīya) prosecution, office of the district attorney; النيابة رئيس chief prosecutor; النيابة وكيل representative of the prosecution, prosecuting attorney; المالية النيابات (mālīya) the financial delegations (in Algeria)
نيابي niyābī vicarious, deputed, delegated; representative; parliamentary │ نيابية حكومة representative (parliamentary) government; نيابي مجلس (majlis) parliament
مناب manāb replacement, substitution, proxy, deputyship; substitute; office performed by proxy, place taken as deputy; share, portion, allotment │ ناب   منابه to represent s.o., substitute for s.o., act in s.o.’s behalf
مناوبة munāwaba alternation, rotation; munāwabatan alternately, in rotation, by turns, successively, one by one, one after the other │ بالمناوبة do.; الري مناوبة m. ar-rīy (Eg.) periodic rotation in irrigation انابة ināba authorization; deputation, delegation, appointment as authorized agent or deputy │ قضائية انابات (qaḍā’īya) requests for legal assistance (from court to court)
تناوب tanāwub alternation, rotation, periodic change; O alternation (el.) │ بالتناو ب successively, one after the other, one by one, by turns, alternately, in rotation 1007
نائب nā’ib pl. نواب nuwwāb representative, agent, proxy, substitute, alternate; delegate; deputy; (with foll. genit.) vice-; authorized agent; sergeant (formerly, Syr.; mil.); authorized representative of a cadi, assistant magistrate (Isl. Law), also شرعي نائب (šar‘ī) │ الرئيس نائب vice-president; vice- chairman; عام نائب (‘āmm) or عمومي نائب
 (‘umūmī) public prosecutor; العريف نائب corporal (Ir.); القنصل نائب n. al-qunṣul vice- consul; الملك نائب n. al-malik viceroy; نائب مالي (mālī) financial delegate (Alg.); مجلس النواب majlis an-n. house of representatives, parliament
نائب nā’ib share, portion; allotment; contingent, quota; distributive share in estate, statutory portion
نائبة nā’iba pl. -āt, نوائب nawā’ib  vicissitudes, ups and downs (of luck, of a battle, etc.); heavy blow, disaster, calamity, misfortune
منوب munawwib mandator (jur.); constituent, voter
منوب munawwab: منوب ضابط officer on duty, commander of the guard
مناوب munāwib on duty (esp. officer)
منيب munīb repentant
متناوب mutanāwib alternating, alternate, rotating, successive │ متناوب تيار (ṭayyār) alternating current (el.)
Nubia an-nūba bilād بالد النوبة 
نوبي nūbī Nubian (adj. and n.)
 نوت) نات) (naut) to away, real, totter, stagger
نوت also (mus.), notes nōta نوتة and nōt نوت  al-mūsīqā n. الموسيقى
نوتة nōta note, remark
  نوتي nūtī pl. نواتي nawātīy, نوتية nūtīya seaman, mariner, sailor; skipper │ اول نوتي seaman apprentice, ممتاز نوتي (mumtāz) seaman (mil.; Eg. 1939); السفينة نواتي ship’s crew
 نوح nūḥ Noah
 نوح) ناح) nāḥa u (nauḥ, نواح nuwāḥ, نياح niyāḥ, نياحة niyāḥa, مناح manāḥ) to wail, weep, lament; to mourn, bemoan, bewail (على s.o.); to coo (pigeon) ill to be opposite s.th. (ھ), lie face to face (ھ with), face (ھ s.th.) V to awing; to pendulate, dangle; to sway VI to howl, whine (wind)
نوح nauḥ and نواح nuwāḥ loud loud weeping, wailing, lamentation (for the dead)
نواح nawwāḥ mourner
نواحة nawwāḥa hired female mourner
نائحات nawā’iḥ , نوائح pl. nā’iḥa نائحة
nā’iḥa hired female mourner
مناحة manāḥa lamentation, wailing, mourning
نوخ II to halt for a rest; to take up residence IV to make (ھ a camel) kneel down; to stay, remain (ب at a place) │ بكلكله البؤس عليه اناخ (bu’su bi-kalkalihī) to be in great distress, be in a gray, plight X to kneel down
مناخ manāk pl. -āt halting place, way station; residence, abode; -- munāk, manāk climate
مناخي munākī, manākī climatic
نود) ناد) nāda u (naud, نواد nuwād, نودان nawadān) and V to away; to awing back and forth; to pendulate
 نور II to flower, blossom, be in bloom; to put forth or bear (ھ blossoms); to light, illuminate, fill with light, furnish with lights (ل or ه s.th.); to shed light (ل or ه on s.th.); to enlighten (ل or ه s.o.); to light (ھ a lamp) IV انار anāra to light, illuminate, fill with light, furnish with 1008 lights (ھ s.th.); to throw light (ھ on a problem), elucidate, explain, clarify (ھ a problem); انور anwara to come to light, show, appear, be uncovered, be disclosed, be revealed V to be lighted, be lit, be illuminated; to receive enlightenment, be enlightened X to seek enlightenment, insight, or an explanation; to receive light, be lighted, be lit, be illuminated; to obtain enlightenment, gain insight, get an explanation, receive information
نار nār f., pl. نيران nīrān fire; rifle fire, gunfire; conflagration; النار Hell │ النار جبل jabal an-n. volcano; النار شريط slow match, fuse; النار شيخ šaik an-n. the Devil; من اشھر علم على نار (‘alam) very famous; نار على كان to be on pins and needles; حامية نيران (ḥāmiya) heavy fire, drumfire (mil.)
ناري nārī fiery, igneous, fire- (in compounds); burning, blazing, red-hot │ نارية آلة (in popular usage) motor, any motor-driven device; نارية دراجة (darrāja) motorcycle; ناري سالح firearm; ناري شھم (sahm) rocket; ناري طلق (ṭalaq) shot (from a firesrm), rifleshot, gunshot; نارية العاب
 fireworks; ناري مقذوف projectile (of a firearm), bullet, shell
نور naur (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. اانوارanwār
blossom(s), flower(s)
نور nūr pl. انوار anwār light; ray of light, light beam; brightness, gleam, glow; illumination; light, lamp; O head-light (of an automobile); lantern │ O براق نور (barrāq) blinker, flashing light; O ثابت نور steady light; الداللة نور ad-dalāla leading light (naut.); كشاف نور (kaššāf) or كاشف نور searchlight (mil.); O خفية انوار (kafīya) indirect lighting; النور ام umm an-n. the Virgin Mary; النور سبت sabt an-n. Easter Saturday (Chr.); نور عليك bravo! excellent! well done! النور رأى to come into being, come into the world, be born
نوري nūrī luminary, luminous, like light; light-, lighting- (in compounds); bright, shining, brilliant, radiant
نوراني nūrānī luminous
نورانية nurānīya luminosity, brilliance
نور nawar (coll.) gypsies; vagabonds, tramps
نوري nawarī gypsy; vagabond, tramp
< نور nūra lime; depilatory agent
نير nayyir luminous; shining, brilliant; lighted, illuminated, brightly lit, full of light; clear, plain, distinct; النيران sun and moon
نواوير pl. )ة un. n. (coll.; nuwwār نوار
nawāwīr  blossom(s), flower(s)
منار manār and منارة manāra pl. مناور manāwir , منائر manā’ir  lighthouse; minaret
منور manwar pl. مناور manāwir  light hole (in a wall); skylight
تنوير tanwīr flowering, blossoming, bloom, efflorescence; lighting, illumination; enlightenment; التنوير and العقول تنوير the Enlightenment
below see مناورة
انارة ināra lighting. illumination; enlightenment
نائرة nā’ira hatred, flame of war
منور munawwar lighted, illuminated; enlightened; shining, brilliant; bright │ المنورة epithet of Medina
منير munīr luminous, radiant, brilliant, shining; enlightening, illuminative │ جسم منير (jism) luminous body, luminary, illuminant
متنور mutanawwir lighted, illuminated
مستنير mustanīr lighted, illuminated; enlightened; educated; an educated person 1009
shunting trick; maneuver; munāwara مناورة  │ maneuvers military مناورات (railroad); maneuvers; air (jawwīya) مناورات جوية عامل maneuver; diplomatic مناورة دبلوماسية shunter المناورة
نورج nauraj pl. نوارج nawārij  threshing machine, thresher
نورز nauraz (coll.; n. un. ة) sea gull(s) (zool.)
نورستانيا nūrastāniyā neurasthenia
نوروز naurūz Persian New Year’s Day
 نوص) ناس) nāsa u (naus, نوسان nawasān) to dangle, swing back and forth, bob
نواس nawwās dangling, bobbing, swinging; O pendulum (Syr.)
nawāwīs  نواويس pl. na’ūs ناءوس nāwūs, ناووس 
sarcophagus
 ناس nās people, see انس
نوسر nausara to form a fistula (ناسور)
نوش III to skirmish, engage in a skirmish (ه with s.o.); to brush (ھ against s.th.), play ( ھ around or about s.th.)
نوشة nauša (eg.) typhoid fever
مناوشة munāwaša skirmish, engagement, encounter │ حربية مناوشة (ḥarbīya) engagement, armed clash; pl. hostilities
manāwīšī مناويشي and munāwīš مناويش
(eg.) bluish purple
نوشادر nūšādir ammonia
(ناص (نوص nāṣa u (nauṣ, مناص manāṣ, منيص manīṣ) to avoid, shirk, evade, dodge (عن s.th.), flee, draw hack (عن from) VIII to grow dim, die down (light, lamp)
نوص nauṣ wild ass, onager
 مناص manāṣ and منيص manīṣ avoidance, shirking, evasion; escape, way out │ منه مناص ال (manāṣa) inevitable, unavoidable
نوط) ناط) nāṭa u (nauṭ, نياط niyāṭ) to hang, suspend (ھ ب s.th. on); to entrust (ھ ب s.th. to s.o., ب ھ s.o. with), commission (ھ ب s.o. to do s.th.), charge (ب ھ s.o. with); to make dependent, conditional (ب or ه على s.th. on); pass. نيط nīṭa to depend, be dependent, be conditional (ب on), he linked (ب to), be connected (ب with), belong (ب to); to be entrusted (ب to s.o.); to hang, be suspended (على on) II and IV = I │ بشرط اناطه (bi-šarṭin) to make s.th. dependent on (or subject to) a condition, make s.th. conditional; بعھدته اناطه
(bi-‘uhdatihī) to entrust s.o. with the responsibility for s.th., make s.o. responsible for s.th.
نوط nauṭ pl. انواط anwāṭ, نياط niyāṭ s.th. suspended, hanging, or attached; decoration, medal, order, badge of honor
│ الجدارة نوط n. al-jadāra order of merit
منظر يشق له │ sorta niyāṭ نياط pl. naiṭ نيط heart- a yušaqqu) (manẓarun نياط القلوب the break to قطع نياط القلوب light; rending heart
مناط manāṭ place where s.th. is suspended; object, butt (e.g., of mockery); anchor (of hope) │ الثريا مناوط m. at- turayyā or الجوزاء مناط m. al-jauzā’ the highest heavens, as high, or as far, as the Pleiades (or Gemini, respectively)
تنوط tanawwuṭ, tunawwiṭ weaverbird
منوط manūṭ dependent, conditional (ب on)
منوط munawwaṭ entrusted, commissioned (ب with), in charge of (ب)
مناط munāṭ entrusted, commissioned (ب with), in charge of (ب)
نوع II to divide into various kinds, classify (ھ s.th.); to make different, diversify, vary, variegate (ھ s.th.), give variety (ھ to); to change, alter, vary, modify, alter in its outward appearance (ھ s.th.), 1010 change the appearance (ھ of) V to be of various kinds or forms; to be
manifold, diverse, varying, variegated, multiform, complex
نوع nau’ pl. انواع anwā’ kind, sort, type, species; variety; way, manner, mode, fashion; form; nature, character, quality, grade; نوعا nau’an somewhat, a little; to a certain extent, in some measure, in a certain way, so to speak, as it were │ نوعا ما somehow or other, in a way, after a fashion, somewhat; وكمية نوعا (wa- kammīyatan) in nature and quantity, qualitatively and quantitatively; خاص بنوع (kāṣṣ) in particular, especially; من األول نوعه the first of his (its) kind; على ظالمون انواعھم oppressors of all kinds, all sorts of oppressors; اإلنسان نوع or اإلنساني النوع the human race
نوعي nau’ī relative to the nature or type; characteristic, peculiar, proper; essential; specific │ نوعي (وزن) ثقل (tiql, wazn) specific gravity
تنويع tanwī’ change, alteration, modification
تنوع tanawwu’ diversity, variety, multiplicity; change, change-over, readjustment
منوع munawwa’ different, diverse, various, miscellaneous, sundry, manifold, multifarious, complex
متنوع mutanawwi’ different, diverse, various, miscellaneous, sundry, manifold, multifarious, complex; متنوعات miscellany (heading of a newspaper column)
 نوف) and نيف) ناف nāfa u (nauf) to be high, lofty, exalted, sublime; to exceed (عن or على s.th., esp., a number), be above (عن or على), be more than (عن or على), go beyond (عن or الحمسين على ينوف ما │ (على more than fifty II نيف nayyafa and IV to go beyond ( عن or على), be more than (عن or على), exceed (عن or على s.th.) │ ثالث عن ينيف ما سنوات (talāt sanawātin) more than three years, over three years
ناف nāf yoke
نوف nauf pl. انواف anwāf that which exceeds a number or measure, excess, overplus, surplus
نيف nayyif excess, overplus, surplus │ و نيف or ونيف together with round figures:
 some ..., ... and some, ... odd, e.g., نيف وعشرون some twenty, twenty and some, twenty odd
نيافة niyāfa Excellency, Eminence (Copt.-Chr.; title of cardinals and bishops)
منيف munīf high, tall, lofty; exalted, sublime; outstanding, excellent
 منوفي manūfī a brand of Egyptian cotton
نوفمبر nūfimbir, novembir November
نوق V تنوق tanawwaqa and تنيق tanayyaqa to be squeamish, fastidious, finical, dainty, choosy (في in) X استنوق istanwaqa: استنوق الجمل (jamala) he mistook the he-camel for a she-camel (proverbially of a mistake)
ناقة nāqa pl. نوق nūq, نياق niyāq, ناقات nāqāt she-camel │ جمل وال األمر في لي ناقة ال (nāqata, jamala) I have no hand in this matter, I have nothing to do with it
نيق nayyiq squeamish, finical, fastidious, choosy, dainty, overnice
انواك anwāk  foolish, silly, stupid
نول) نال) nāla u (naul) to give, donate, present, offer, hold out, grant, award (ب ل or ه to
s.o. s.th.), confer, bestow (ل ب or ه upon
s.o. s.th.) II to let (ه s.o.) obtain (ھ s.th.), give, afford, bring, yield (ه ھ to s.o. s.th.) III to give, hand, pass, present, offer, extend, serve, hand over, deliver (ل ھ or ه to s.o. s.th.) │ القربان ناوله (qurbāna) to administer the Communion to 1011 s.o. (Chr.) VI to reach (ھ for s.th.), take (ھ s.th.); to accept (ھ s.th.; to receive, get, obtain (ھ s.th.); to take, eat (ھ food), have (ھ a meal, tea, coffee, etc.); to take s.th. ( ھ) out of (من), derive, draw, obtain (ھ من s.th. from); to take in, grasp, comprehend (ھ the meaning of s.th.); to take up, treat, discuss (ھ a subject), deal with (ھ); to extend (ھ to), include, encompass (ھ s.th.); to reach (ه s.o.; of a glance); to partake of the Communion, communicate (Chr.)
نول naul pl. انوال anwāl gift; way, manner, mode, fashion; loom; freightage, freight
نوال nawāl gift, s.th. received; favor, benefit; that which is proper, right, incumbent, a duty │ كذا تفعل ان نوالك you
must do this; بنوال ذلك ليس that’s improper, that isn’t right
منول minwal and منوال minwāl loom
منوال minwāl way, manner, mode, fashion; method, procedure; form │ على المنوال ھذا in this manner, this way; على ھم واحد منوال they are of one stamp, they are all alike; كذا تفعل ان منوالك you must do it this way
مناولة munāwala presentation, offering, handing over, delivery; Communion (Chr.)
تناول tanāwul taking of food, eating, drinking; comprehension, grasp, receptivity; Communion (Chr.)
متناول mutanāwil reaching out, taking, seizing, grabbing; partaking of the Lord’s Supper, communicating; communicant
متناول mutanāwal attainable, available, within reach; attainableness, availability; reach, range │ متناوال اعسر difficult to reach, hard to get at; يده متناول (في) تحت (m. yadihī) available, at s.o.’s disposal, within reach, handy, on hand; متناوله في attainable to s.o., within s.o.’s reach; الجميع متناول في within everybody’s means; كل متناول في األفھام comprehensible to all, understood by all; متناول في ھ جعل to bring s.th. within s.o.’s reach, make s.th. attainable, available to s.o.
نوالين pl. nāwulūn ناولون and naulūn نولون
nawālīn  freightage, freight
نوم) نام) nāma (1  pers. perf. nimtu) a (naum, نيام niyām) to sleep, slumber; to go to bed; to go to sleep; to abate, subside, let up, calm down, be calm (wind, sea, etc.); to be inactive, dull, listless (market); to be benumbed, be numb (limb); to neglect, omit, overlook (عن s.th.), forget (عن about s.th.), fail to think of (عن); to be reassured (الى by s.th.), accept (الى s.th.), assent (الى to), acquiesce (الى in); to place confidence (الى in s.o.), trust (الى s.th.) │ جفنه ملء ينام (mil’a jafnihī) he sleeps the sleep of the just II to lull (ه s.o.) to sleep, make (ه s.o.) sleep, put to bed (ه, esp., a child); to anesthetize, narcotize, put to sleep (ه s.o.) IV = II; VI to pretend to be asleep; to place confidence, put trust (الى in s.o.) X to let o.s. be lulled to sleep or narcotized (
 ل by s.th.); to accede (ل to s.th.), comply ( ل with); to trust (الى s.o.), have confidence (الى in s.o.), rely, depend (الى on s.o.); to entrust (الى ب s.th. to s.o.); to be reassured (الى by s.th.), accept tacitly (الى s.th.), acquiesce (الى in s.th.), content o.s. be content (الى with)
نوم naum sleep, slumber │ النوم غرفة gurfat an-n. bedroom; النوم قميص night, gown, nightshirt
نومي naumī of or pertaining to sleep, somn(i)-, sleeping- (in compounds)
نومة nauma sleep, nap
نومة nuwama one who sleeps much, sleeper
نوام nawwām one given to sleep, sleeper
نؤوم na’ūm sound asleep; one given to sleep, sleeper; late riser, slugabed 1012
منام manām sleep; (pl. -āt) dream
منام manām place to sleep; bedroom, dormitory
منامة manāma place to sleep; bedroom, dormitory; nightwear, nightgown, night- shirt; -- المنامة Manama (capital of Bahrein Islands)
تنويم tanwīm lulling to sleep; narcotization, anesthetization; hypnotism, hypnosis
نائم nā’im pl. نيام niyām, نوم nuwwam, نيم nuyyam, نوام nuwwām, نيام nuyyām sleeping; asleep; numb, benumbed (limb); calm, tranquil, peaceful (night)
منوم munawwim sleep-inducing, somniferous, soporific; narcotic; hypnotist; (pl. -āt) a soporific, somnifacient │ منوم جرعة (jur‘a) soporific potion, sleeping draught, nightcap; دواء منوم (dawā’) a soporific, somnifacient
نون II to add a final nūn (ھ to a noun), provide with the nunnation (ھ a noun; gram.)
نون nūn pl. -āt name of the letter ن; -- (pl. نينان nīnān, انوان anwān) large fish, whale │ النون ذو the Prophet Jonah
نوني nūnī shaped like a ن, crescent- shaped
نونة nūna dimple in the chin
تنوين tanwīn nunnation (gram.) │ ھما واإلضافة كالتنوين (iḍāfa) they are like day and light, they are diametrically opposed, they are as unlike as they could be
نوه II to raise, elevate (ھ s.th.); to praise, laud, extol, acclaim (ب s.o.), speak highly (ب of); to commend, cite (ب s.o. or s.th.); to
.trees, emphasize (ب s.th.); to make mention, speak (ب of s.o. or s.th.), refer (ب to, also عن to s.th.), name, mention (عن s.th.); to hint (عن or ب or الى at). allude (عن or ب or الى to), intimate, imply (عن or ب or الى s.th.)
نوه tanwīh encomium, tribute, praise; mentioning, mention; reference; hint, allusion
نوى nawā i (نية nīya, نواة nawāh) to intend, propose, purpose, plan, have in mind, make up one’s mind (ھ to do s.th.), resolve, determine (ھ on s.th. or to do s.th.); -- i (نوى nawan) to absent o.s., go away (عن or من from) II to miaow (cat) III to make an enemy of s.o. (ه), fall out with
s.o. (ه), be hostile, antagonistic (ه to), declare o.s. the enemy (ه of) VIII to propose, purpose, intend (ھ to do s.th.)
نوى nawan remoteness, distance; destination
نوى nawan (coll.) date pits; fruit kernels, atones
نواة nawāh (n. un.) pl. نويات nawayāt date pit; fruit kernel, stone; core; center; atomic nucleus; nucleus (fig., from which s.th. will grow), central point, starting point │ الذرة نوة n. ad-darra atomic nucleus
نووي nawawī nuclear, nucleal, nuclei-, nuclea- (in compounds); of or pertaining to nuclear physics, nuclear, atomic │ اسلحة نووية (asliḥa) nuclear weapons
ني nayy fat; see also under نئ
نية nīya pl. -āt, نوايا nawāyā intention, intent, design, purpose, plan, scheme; determination, will, volition, direction of will; tendency, inclination, desire │ نية على with the intention to ...; ان نية في it is intended to ...; النية حسن ḥusn an-n. good intention, good will, sincerity, honesty; النية سالمة salāmat an-n. guilelessness,
 innocence, sincerity; bona fides, good faith (jur.); النية سليم undesigning, guileless, artless, sincere; simplehearted, ingenuous, simple-minded; النية سوء sū’ an-n. evil intent, insincerity, malice, 1013 cunning, deceit; (jur.) bad faith, mala fides, dolus malus; النية بسوء against one’s better judgment; (jur.) in bad faith, mala fide; النية صافي ṣāfī an-n. sincere, candid, frank, openhearted; النية له اخلص (nīyata) to be loyally attached to s.o. or s.th.; النية له اخلص ل or في نيته حسنت ḥasunat nīyatuhū li do.; to have good intentions, be well- intentioned toward ...; نيته اصلح (nīyatahū) to evoke the right intention in one’s heart (ethical and religious); على النية عقد to determine on s.th., resolve to do s.th., direct one’s intention to
مناو munāwin hostile, unfriendly
نيء) ناء) nā’a i (نيء nay’, نيوء nuyū’, نيوءة nuyū’a) to be raw, uncooked (esp., meat)
نيء nī’, ني nīy raw; unripe; gross (weight); see also under نوى
اناييب nuyūb, نيوب anyāb, انياب pl. nāb ناب
anāyīb  canine tooth, eyetooth; tusk; fang
│ انيابه عن كشر (kaššara) to bare one’s teeth
نيب nuyūb, نيوب anyāb, انياب pl. nāb ناب
nīb old she-camel
nitrogen nitrōžé نيتروجين
متنيح mutanayyaḥ late lamented, deceased (Chr.; eg.)
نور see nayyir نير  
yoke nīrān نيران anyār, انيار pl. nīrنير  
نيرة nīra gums (of the teeth)
نيروز nairūz New Year’s Day (Chr.-Copt.)
نيزك naizak pl. نيازك nayāzik  short lance; shooting star, meteor
نيس nīs Nice (seaport in S France)
نيسان nīsān   April (Syr., leb., Jord., Ir.)
)نشان )نشن see nīšān نيشان porcupine nīṣ نيص
نوط see نيط، نياط نوف see نيف
نوق see نيق
نيقوسيا nīqōsiyā Nicosia (capital of Cyprus)
نيك) ناك) nāka i to have sexual intercourse (ھا with a woman)
نيكل nikl nickel
 نيل) نال) nāla (1  pers. perf. niltu) a (nail, منال manāl) to obtain, attain, achieve (ھ s.th.), get hold, get possession (ھ of); to win, gain, acquire, earn (ھ s.th.); to get, obtain, procure (ھ ل s.th. for s.o.); to accomplish ( ھ من s.th. with s.o.), succeed (ھ من in s.th. with s.o.), get s.th. (ھ) from s.o. (من); to affect, influence (من s.o., s.th.), bear upon s.th. (من); to cause damage, do harm (من to s.o., to s.th.), prejudice, impair, harm (من s.th.) │ عرضه من نال (‘irḍihī) to decry, depreciate, discredit, defame, malign, slander s.o.; منال اوفر منه نال (aufara manālin) to do s.o. untold damage, harm
s.o. most grievously; بسوء ناله (bi-sū’in) to harm s.o. or s.th.; بضر ناله (bi-ḍurrin) do.; منال ابلغ نفسه من نال see منال below IV to make or let (ل or ه s.o.) obtain (ھ s.th.), procure, get (ھ ل or ه s.th. for s.o.)
نيل nail obtainment, attainment, acquisition; a favor received
منال manāl obtainment, attainment, achievement, acquisition │المنال بعيد unattainable; intangible, impalpable, far from reality; المنال صعب ṣa‘b al-m. unattainable; منال (سھل) قريب (sahl) easy to get, attainable; المنال ممكن mukmin al-m. attainable; منال ابلغ نفسه من نال (ablaga manālin) it made the deepest impression on him
نائل nā’il acquirer, earner, obtainer, gainer, winner; a favor received, a boon, benefit, gain 1014
 نيل II to dye with indigo (ھ s.th.)
نيل nīl, نيلة nīla indigo plant, indigo
منيل munayyal dyed with indigo
  نيل II (eg.) to channel Nile water onto the fields for the purpose of alluviating the soil
النيل an-nīl the Nile │ النيل زمن zaman an-nīl time of the Nile inundation; عرائس النيل flowers of the European white water lily (nenuphar)
نيلي nīlī of the Nile, Nile (adj.), Nilotic
 منيل manyal Nilometer
تنييل tanyīl (eg.) allviation of the soil by irrigation or inundation
نيلج nīlaj indigo
نيلوفر nīlūfar European white water lily, nenuphar
نيلون nailōn, nīlōn nylon
نينة nīna mother
نوى  see نية
نيورالجيا niyūraljiyā neuralgia نيزيالندا niyūzīlandā New Zealand نيوني ضوء ḍau’ niyūnī neon light

ھ
ھا hā ha! look! there! ھو ھا hā huwa look, there he is! انتم ھا hā antum you there! as a prefix (mostly written defectively): ھذا hādā, f. ھذه hādihī, ھذي hādī, pl. ھؤالء hā’ulā’i, dual m. ھذان hādānī, f. ھاتان hātāni this one, this; see also alphabetically; -- ھذاك hādāka, f. ھاتيك hātīka pl. ھؤالئك hā’ulā’ika that one, that;
-- ھكذا hākadā so, thus; وھكذا wa-hākadā and so forth; -- ھاھنا hāhunā here; -- ھاءناذا، ھأنذا hā’anādā, ھأنتذا ذا، انت ھا hā’antadā, ھا اوالء نحن ھا ذا، ھو I (emphatic form); you there; this one, that one, that; we here, etc.; here I am! there you are! etc.; -- with suffix: ھاك hāka pl. ھاكم hākum, here, take it! there you are! there you have ...! following (below) is (are) ...; ھاكه hākahū there he is
ھاء hā’ pl. -āt name of the letter ھ ھابيل hābīl  Abel
ھات hāti pl. ھاتوا hātū give me (us) ...! bring me (us) ...! let me (us) have ...!
ھا under see ھاتان
ھاتور hātōr Hator, the third month of the Coptic calendar
ھارب (Engl.) harb harp (musical instrument)
ھشم see ھاشمي
الھافر al-hāvir le Havre (seaport in N France)
ھا see ھاكه and ھاك، ھاكم
ھا see ھؤالء ھا see ھأنذا، ھأمتذا
ھانم hānum pl. ھوانم hawānim  lady, woman
ھوانمي hawānimī ladylike, womenlike, feminine
ھأھأ ha’ha’a to burst into laughter
ھا see ھاھنا
ھاواي hāwāy Hawaii
ھاون hāwun, ھاوون hāwūn pl. ھواوين hawāwīn , اھوان ahwān mortar (vessel) │ الھاون مدفع midfa’ al-hā. mortar (mil.) 1015
ھايتي haitī Haiti
 ھب hab imperative of وھب
 ھب habba u (habb) to get in motion, start moving; to approach, attack, tackle (الى or ل s.th.), embark (الى or ل upon), begin (الى or ل with), start doing s.th. (الى or ل); (with foll. imperf.) to proceed abruptly to do s.th., set out to do s.th.; to rush, fly (الى at s.o.); to wake up; to rise, get up (من from, esp., from sleep); to revolt, rebel, rise (على against s.o.); -- (habb, ھبوب hubūb, ھبيب habīb) to blow (wind); to rage (storm); to break out (fire); to waft, drift (على in s.o.’s direction; of a scent), meet (على s.o.; of a pleasant smell) │ للحرب ھب (ḥarb) to take up arms, enter the war; للمقاومة ھب (muqāwama) to take up arm, in opposition, rise in arms; واقفا ھب (wāqifan) to plant o.s., station o.s, stand; ريحه ھبت (rīḥuhū) he is in clover, he is in luck'. way, he has a lucky hand with everything; الكلب فيه ھب (kalb) the dog attacked him, fell upon him; ودب وھب من كل (man, dabba) everybody and his brother, every Tom, Dick and Harry II to tear, rend (ھ s.th.); to blacken with soot (ھ s.th.); to besmut (ھ s.th.); to botch, bungle, do in slipshod manner (ھ s.th.) IV to wake up, awaken, rouse (ه من s.o. from sleep) V to be torn
ھبة habba gust, squall
وھب see hiba ھبة dust fine habāb ھباب
ھباب hibāb soot, smut
ھبوب habūb strong wind, gale
 ھبوب hubūb blowing (of the wind)
مھب mahabb pl. مھاب mahābb  place where or from which the wind blows; windy side, weather side, direction of the wind; blowing of the wind; draft │ مھب في الريح storm-swept, exposed to storms, threatened by storms
ھبت habata i (habt) to knock out, fell, throw to the ground (ه s.o.); pass. hubiṭa to be despondent, faint-hearted; to be dim- witted
ھبيت habīt despondent, faint-hearted, cowardly; dim-witted
ھبر habara u (habr) to mangle (with the teeth;
ه s.o.); to carve into large pieces (ھ meat)
ھبر habr boned meat
ھبرة habra piece or slice of meat
h. abū ابو ھبيرة │ hyena hubaira ھبيرة
frog
ھبش habaša i (habš) to gather up, gather, collect (ھ s.th.); to seize, grab, clutch (ب with the hand or with the claws)
ھبط habaṭa u i (ھبوط hubūṭ) to descend, go down, come down; to fall down, drop; to settle down; to sink; to dip, slope down; to fall to the ground; to fall in, come down, collapse (roof); to set down, land, alight (airplane, travelers, ھ in a country); to lose weight, become lean (body); to abate, subside, let up, stop, die down (wind, fire, etc.); to fall, drop, slump (prices); to go, come (ھ to a place); -- u (habṭ) and IV to cause to sink or descend, lower, let down, bring down, take down, send down, fling down, throw down (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to lower, out down, reduce (ھ the price); to come (ھ to a place)
ھبط habṭ reduction, lowering; decrease, diminution
ھبطة habṭa decent, decline, fall, drop; depression (geogr.)
ھبوط hubūṭ sinking; fall, drop, decline, decent; diminution, lessening, lowering, reduction (of the price); decrease; weakness, feebleness; slump (on the stock market); (airborne) landing │ 1016 ھبوط اضطراري (iḍṭirārī) emergency landing;
الخم ھبوط h. ar-raḥim prolapse of the uterus, hysteroptosis
ھبوط habūṭ slope, declivity, drop, cliff, bluff
ھبيط habīṭ emaciated, skinny, enervated, worn out
ahābiṭ  اھابط pl. uhbūṭa اھبوطة O
parachute
مھبط mahbiṭ pl. مھابط mahābiṭ  place of a fall, of descent; landing place, airstrip, runway; falling, faU. drop; place of origin, birth place, cradle (fig.); O cathode (el.) │ الوحي مھبط m. al-waḥy the cradle of Islam; الغروب مھبط في at (the time of) sunset
ھابط Ilabil descending, falling, dropping, sinking │ O الواقية بالمظلة ھابط (miẓalla, wāqiya) paratrooper
مھبوط mahbūṭ emaciated, skinny, enervated, worn out
ھبل habila a (habal) to be bereaved of her son (mother) V to take a vapor bath VIII to avail o.s., take advantage (ھ of an opportunity); to intrigue. scheme │ اھتبل ھبلك ihtabil habalaka watch out for your own interests! take care of your own affairs! mind your own business!
ھبل hiball a tall, husky man
ھبيل habīl dolt, fool
اھبل ahbal , f. ھبالء hablā’ , pl. ھبل hubl dim-witted, weak-minded, imbecilic, idiotic
مھبل mahbal, mahbil pl. مھابل mahābil 
vagina
مھبلي mahbalī vaginal
مھبل mihbal nimble
مھبول mahbūl stupid, imbecilic, idiotic; dolt, dunce, fool
ھبھب habhaba to bark, bay
ھبھاب habhāab mirage, fata morgana; swift, nimble
ھبو) ھبا) habā u (ھبو hubuw) to rise in the air (dust, smoke); to run away, bolt, take to sight
ھبوة habwa pl. habawāt swirl of dust
 ھباء habā’ pl. اھباء ahbā’ fine dust; dust particles floating in the air │ منثصور ھباء atoms scattered in all directions; ھباء ذھب (habā’an) to vanish. dissolve into nothing, end in smoke; منثورا ھباء ذھب (habā’an) or منثورا ھباء ضاع (ḍā‘a) to go up in smoke, fall through, come to nought, dissolve into nothing; ھباء به ذھب (habā’an) to ruin, thwart s.th.; to scatter s.th. in all directions
ھباءة hbā’a (n. un.) dust particle; mote
 ھتر hatara i (hatr) to tear to pieces (ھ s.th.) III to abuse, revile, insult, call names (ه s.o.) IV (also pass. uhtira) to become feeble-minded, childish (old man) VI to revile each other, fling accusations at each other; to be contradictory, conflicting (testimonies; Isl. Law) X to be negligent and careless; to act in a reckless, irresponsible manner; to make light (ب of s.th.), attach little importance (ب to), slight, disdain, despise (ب s.th.); to jeer, scoff (y at s.o.), deride, ridicule, mock (ب s.o.); pass. ustuhtira to be infatuated (ب with), dote (ب on)
ھتر hitr pl. اھتار ahtār drivel, twaddle, childish talk; lie, untruth, falsity, falsehood
ھتر hutr feeble-mindedness, dotage
مھاترة muhātara abuse, revilement, vituperation, insult; pl. -āt wrangle, bickering
تھاتر tahātur confrontation of similar evidence (Isl. Law) 1017
استھتار istihtār recklessness, thoughtlessness; wantonness, unrestraint, licentiousness; disdain, scorn
مھتر muhtar driveling, twaddling, raving; childish old man
مستھتر mustahtir heedless, careless; reckless, thoughtless, irresponsible; wanton, unrestrained, uninhibited
مستھتر mustahtar blindly devoted (ب to), infatuated (ب with), doting (ب on)
 ھاتور look up alphabetically
ھتف hatafa i (hatf) to coo (pigeons); -- (ھتاف hutāt) to shout; to rejoice, shout with joy; to acclaim, hail, cheer, applaud (ل or ب s.o.); to jeer, boo (ضد s.o.); to praise
highly, extol (ب s.th.) │ به ھتف to call out to s.o.; ھاتف به ھتف (hātifun) a voice called out to him, an invisible force told him, made him (do s.th.); بحياته ھتف (bi- ḥayātihī) to cheer s.o.; ثالثا ھتف (talātan) to give (ل s.o.) three cheers VI to shout encouragement to one another, encourage one another (على to do s.th.)
ھتفة hatfa shout, cry, call
ھتاف hutāf pl. -āt shout, cry, call; exclamation of joy; hurrah; acclamation, acclaim, applause; cheer (ل to s.o.) │ ھتاف الحرب h. al-ḥarb battle cry, war cry; عاصفة الھتاف storm of applause, thundering applause
ھاتف hātif shouting, calling loudly; (in earlier Sufism) invisible caller, voice; (pl. ھواتف hawātif) telephone; O loudspeaker; pl. ھواتف exclamations, shouts, cries, calls
بالھاتف voice; inner al-qalb h. ھاتف القلب │
by telephone
ھاتفي hātifī telephonic, telephone- (in compounds)
ھتك hataka i (hatk) to tear apart, rip apart (ھ s.th., esp., a curtain, a veil); to unveil, uncover, discover, disclose, reveal (ھ s.th.); to disgrace, rape, ravish (ھا a woman) │ عرضه ھتك (‘irḍahū) to disgrace
s.o. II to tear to shreds, rip to pieces, tatter (ھ s.th.) V to get torn; to be exposed, shown up, discredited, disgraced, dishonored, ravished, raped; to give o.s. over (في to s.th. disgraceful); to be disgraceful, dishonorable, shameless, impudent VIII pass. of hataka
ھتك hatk tearing, rending, ripping apart; disclosure, exposure, exposé; dishonoring, disgracing, degradation, debasement, rape, ravishing │ األسرار ھتك disclosure, uncovering of s.th. hidden
ھتكة hutka dishonoring, disgracing, degradation, debasement
ھتيكة hatīka disgrace, scandal
تھتك tahattuk shamelessness, immorality; impudence, insolence
متھتك mutahattik insolent, impudent; shameless, dishonorable
مستھتك mustahtik insolent, impudent; shameless, dishonorable
 ھتامة hutāma s.th. broken off, fragment, breakage
hutm ھتم pl. hatmā’ , ھتماء f. ahtam  اھتم
having no front tooth; toothless
ھتن hatana i (hatn, ھتون hutūn) to discharge a pouring rain (sky)
ھتون hatūn rain-fraught, heavy with rain (cloud)
ھج hajja u (ھجيج hajīj) to burn, be on fire, be aflame; to flame, blaze, be ablaze II to set ablaze, stir up, stoke (ھ the fire)
ھجأ haja’a a (ھجء liar, ھجوء hujū’) to be appeased (hunger) IV جوعه أھجأ (jū‘ahū) to appease s.o.’s hunger
ھجد hajada u (ھجود hujūd) and V to stay awake at night, keep a night vigil; to spend the night in prayer 1018
ھجر hajara u (hajr, ھجران hijrān) to emigrate; to dissociate o.s., separate, part, secede, keep away (ه ھ، from), part company (ه with ); to give up, renounce, forgo, avoid ( ھ s.th.); to abandon, surrender, leave behind (ھ الى s.th. to s.o.), relinquish, leave, give up, vacate (ھ s.th., الى in favor of s.o.) II to induce (ه s.o.) to emigrate in to emigrate IV to leave, abandon, give up (ھ s.th.); to talk nonsense, talk through one’s hat VI to desert one another, part company, separate, break up
ھجر hajr abandonment, forsaking, leaving, separation; avoidance, abstention; separation from the beloved one; hottest time of the day
ھجر hujr obscene language
ھجرة hijra departure, exit; emigration, exodus; immigration (الى to); الھجرة the Hegira, the emigration of the Prophet Mohammed from Mecca to Medina in 622
Medina دار الھجرة │ A.D.
.sA "'in of the Hegira. pertaining
to Mohammed’s emigration │ ھجرية سنة (sana) a year of the Hegira., a year of the Muslim era (beginning with Mohammed’s emigration)
ھجرة hujra, hijra pl. ھجر hujar, hijar agricultural settlement of the Wababi Ikhwan in Nejd
ھجراء hajrā’ obscene languageھجر ھجير hajīr midday heat
ھجيرة hajīra midday heat, midday, noon
مھجر mahjar pl. مھاجر mahājir  place of emigration, retreat, refuge, sanctuary; emigration; settlement, colony
مھاجر mahājir obscenities
مھاجرة multajara emigration
ھاجرة hājira pl. ھواجر hawājir  midday heat, midday, noon; -- (pl. -āt, ھواجر hawājir ) obscene language, obscenity
ھاجري hājirī midday (adj.); excellent, outstanding
مھجور mahjūr abandoned, forsaken, deserted; lonely, lonesome; in disuse, out of use, obsolete, antiquated, archaic
مھاجر muhājir emigrant, émigré; المھاجرون those Meccans who emigrated to Medina in the early period of Islam
ھجس hajasa u i (hajs) to occur all of a sudden ( نفسه في to s.o.), come to s.o.’s mind (في نفسه); to mumble, mutter, talk to o.s.
ھجس hajs idea, thought; foolish talk
ھجسة hajsa pl. hajasāt idea, thought; notion, concept; fear, apprehension, anxiety, concern, misgiving, scruple; pl. fixed ideas, apprehensions, misgivings
ھجاس hajjās braggart, boaster, show-off
ھاجس hājis pl. ھواجس hawājis  idea, thought; notion, concept; fear, apprehension, anxiety, concern, misgiving, scruple; pl. fixed ideas, apprehensions, misgivings
ھجص (eg.) hagaṣ mischief, nuisance, horseplay
ھجع haja‘a a (ھجوع hujū‘) to sleep peacefully; to be or become calm, quiet, still; to be silenced, calm down, subside (uproar, excitement, and the like); -- (haj‘) to appease (ھ the hunger) IV to allay, appease (ھ the hunger)
ھجعة haj‘a slumber
ھجوع hujū‘ slumber; lull, calming down; subsidence, abatement, letup, remission, ebbing (e.g., of a disease)
 مھجع mahja‘ pl. مھاجع mahāji‘  bed- chamber; quarters, barracks room (Syr., mil.) │ المھجع رئيس approx.: barracks orderly, barrack sergeant (Syr., mil.) 1019
ھجل hajala u (hajl) to cast amorous glances, make sheep’s eyes
ھجم hajama u (ھجوم hujūm) to make for s.o. ( على), rush, pounce (على upon s.o.); to attack, assail, charge (على s.o., s.th.); to raid (على s.th.); to take by surprise, capture in a surprise attack, storm (على s.th.); to enter without permission (على s.th.), force one’s way (على into), intrude, tresspass ( على on), invade (على s.th.); to keep quiet II to make (ه s.o.) attack, order s.o. (ه) to attack III to attack, assail, charge (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to launch an attack (ھ on); to make for s.th. (ھ), rush, pounce (ھ upon); to raid (ھ s.th.); to assault (ه s.o.), fall upon s.o. (ه); to intrude, trespass (ھ on), invade (ھ s.th.) IV = II; V to fall upon ( على) VI to attack one another VII to fall down, collapse (house); to be in poor health, be frail; to flew down (tears); to shed tears (eye)
ھجمة hajma pl. hajamāt attack, charge; assault, onset, onslaught, raid, surprise attack, coup de main; severity (of winter)│ O معاكسة ھجمة (mu‘ākisa) counterattack
ھجمي hajmī aggressive, violent, outrageous, brutal
ھجوم hajūm violent wind
ھجوم hujūm attack, charge, assault, onset, onslaught, raid; offensive; fit, attack, paroxysm (of a disease); forward line, forwards (in soccer, and the like) │ جانبي ھجوم (jānibī) flank attack; جوي ھجوم (jawwī) air raid; مضاد ھجوم (muḍādd) or معاكس ھجوم (mu‘ākis) counterattack; خط الھجوم kaṭṭ al-h. forward line (in soccer, and the like); الھجوم قلب qalb al-h. the center forward (in soccer, and the like)
ھجومي hujūmī aggressive, offensive
مھاجمة muhājama attack, charge; assault, onset, onslaught, raid; O police raid, police roundup
تھجم tahajjum pl. -āt assault, attack, raid
مھاجم muhājim attacker, assailant, aggressor; forward (in soccer, and the like)
ھجن hajuna a (ھجنة hujna, ھجانة hajāna, ھجونة hujūna) to be incorrect or faulty II to excoriate, flay, censure scathingly, run down, disparage (ه s.o.) X to consider (ھ s.th.) bad, wrong or improper; to disapprove (ھ of s.th.), condemn, reject (ھ s.th.)
ھجنة hujna fault, defect, shortcoming; meanness, baseness
ھجان hajjān pl. ھجانة hajjāna camel rider
ھجين hajīn pl. ھجن hujun, ھجناء hujanā’ , مھاجين mahājīn , مھاجنة mahājina low, lowly, base, ignoble, mean; -- (pl. ھجن hujun) racing camel, dromedary
ھجينة hajīna pl. ھجائن hajā’in  racing camel, dromedary
استھجان istihjān disapproval, disapprobation
ھجو) ھجا) hajā u (hajw, ھجاء hijā’) to ridicule, mock, satirize, disparage, run down (ه s.o.); to lampoon (ه s.o.) II and V to spell (ه s.th.) III to compose defamatory or satiric poems (ه against s.o.), defame, satirize, lampoon, ridicule, mock (ه s.o.)
VI to ridicule each other in satiric verse
ھجو hajw ridiculing, scoffing; defamation, disparagement; lampoonery, mockery, ridicule, irony; satiric poem, satire
ھجوي hajwī defamatory, denigrating, disparaging, satiric
ھجاء hijā’ derision, ridiculing, scoffing; satire; defamatory poem; (pl. اھجية ahjiya) spelling, successive order of letters; alphabet
ھجائي hijā’ī alphabetical; satiric 1020
اھاجي pl. uhjīya اھجية and uhjuwa اھجوة
ahājīy satiric poem, lampoon
تھجية tahjiya and تھج tahajjin spelling
ھاج hājin spelling; defamatory, denigrating; mocker, scoffer, derider; satirist
ھد hadda u (hadd, ھدود hudūd) to break, crush, break off, pull down, tear down, raze,
 demolish, wreck, destroy (ھ s.th.); to undermine, sap, weaken, ruin (ه ھ، or من s.o., s.th.); -- i (ھديد hadīd) to crash down, fall down, collapse; -- a i (hadd) to be weak and decrepit II to threaten, menace ( ه ب s.o. with), scare, frighten, terrify, daunt, cow, intimidate, brow-beat (ه s.o.) V do. VII to be or get torn down, demolished, razed, wrecked; to fall down, collapse, break down; to be broken down, be dilapidated, be in ruins, be a wreck
ھد hadd razing, pulling down, wrecking; demolition, destruction
ھدة hadda and ھديد hadīd heavy, thudding fall; thud, crash (of s.th. collapsing)
ھداد hadād slowness, gentleness; ھداديك
hadādaika gently! slowly! take it easy!
مھدة mihadda, rock crusher, jawbreaker
تھديد tahdīd pl. -āt threat, menace; intimidation │ بالتشھير تھديد extortion by threats of public exposure, blackmail (jur.)
تھديدي tahdīdī threatening, menacing
تھدد tahaddud threat, menace; intimidation
مھدود mahdūd destroyed, demolished, wrecked │ القوى مھدود m. al-quwā weakened, debilitated, exhausted
مھدد muhaddid menacing, threatening; threatener, menacer
مھدد muhaddad threatened, menaced
ھدأ hada’a a (ھدء had’, ھدوء hudū’) to be calm, still, quiet, tranquil; to become calm, calm down; to subside, abate, let up, die down (storm, etc.); to stop, halt, linger, rest, remain, stay (ب at a place); to stop (عن s.th., doing s.th.), cease (عن to do s.th.) │ روعه ھدأ (rau‘uhū) to become composed, calm down II to calm, quiet, pacify, tranquilize, appease, soothe, placate, temper, assuage, allay (من or ھ s.th., ه s.o.); O to slow down, drive slowly │ ھدأ اعصابه (a‘ṣābahū) to soothe the nerves; ھدأ روعه من (rau‘ihī) to reassure s.o., set s.o.’s mind at rest; روعك ھدئ haddi’ rau‘aka calm down! take it easy! don’t worry! don’t be afraid! روعك من ھدئ (rau‘ika)
calm down! take it easy! IV = II; to lull (ھ a baby) to sleep
ھدء had’ calm(ness), quiet(ness), peace, tranquility, stillness
ھداءة hadā’a calm, quiet, peace, tranquility, stillness
ھدوء hudū’ calm(ness), quiet(ness), peace, tranquility, stillness │ بھدوء calmly, quietly
تھدئة tahdi’a calming, quieting, pacification, tranquilization, appeasement, reassurance; O slowing down, slow driving
ھادئ hādi’ calm, quiet, peaceful, tranquil, still │ القلب ھادئ h. al-qalb calm(ly), confident(ly); البال ھادئ composed(ly), with one’s mind at ease; الھادئ المحيط (muḥīṭ) the Pacific Ocean
ھدب hadaba a (hadab) to have long lashes (eye); to have long, drooping branches (tree) II to fringe, trim with fringes (ھ a garment)
ھدب hadb, hudub (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. اھداب ahdāb eyelashes; fringes │ باھداب trimmed with fringes, fringed; باھدابه تمسك (bi-ahdābihī) to be most devoted to s.o., be at s.o.’s beck and call, be under s.o.’s 1021 thumb; الشيء بأھداب (تعلق) تمسك to adhere, cling to s.th.; الشي بأھداب اخذ to apply o.s. to, attend to, engage in, cultivate, practice s.th.
ھدب hadib having long lashes
أھدب ahdab , f. ھدباء hadbā’ having long lashes
ھداب huddāb (coll.; n. un. ة) fringes; edging, border
ھدج hadaja i (hadj, ھدجان hadajān, ھداج hudāj) to shamble, shuffle along, walk with unsteady, tottering or tremulous steps (old man), totter, hobble, limp II to make (ھ s.th.) tremble V to tremble, quaver, shake (voice)
ھودج haudaj pl. ھوادج hawādij  camel litter, howdah; sedan chair, litter
ھدر hadara i (hadr, ھدير hadīr) to peal, rumble, roll (thunder); to surge (sea); to roar (lion); to bray (donkey, camel); to clamor, raise a din, be noisy; to storm, rage, rant,
 shout, bawl, bellow (person); to snarl (in a fury); to bubble, boil, simmer; (with ب) to blare s.th. out; -- u i (hadr, hadar) to be in vain, be made to no avail (effort); to be spent uselessly (money); to be abed in vain or with impunity (blood); -- (hadr) to shed in vain or with impunity (ھ blood); to spend uselessly, squander, waste (ھ effort or money); to ruin (ھ the health) IV to regard as nonexistent (ھ s.th.); to consider invalid (ھ s.th.); to invalidate, void (ھ s.th.); to thwart, foil, ruin (ھ s.th.)
ھدرا hadran uselessly, to no avail; in vain, for nothing, futilely │ ھدرا ذھب to melt away uselessly, futilely, be spent in vain, be wasted
ھدر hudr fall, tumble
ھدار haddār swirling, rushing, torrential, roaring, raging; surging (sea); weir; spillway, millrace
ھدارة haddāra waterfall
ھدير hadīr roaring, roar; surge, raging, storming, uproar
مھدر muhdar invalid, void
ھدف hadafa u (hadf) to approach (الى s.o. or s.th.). draw or be near s.o. or s.th. (الى); to aim (الى at) IV to approach (الى s.o. or s.th.), draw or be near s.o. or s.th. (الى) V to strut X to be exposed, be open (ل or الى to a danger); to be susceptible or sensiitive (ل to); to make (ھ s.th.) one’s goal or object, aim (ھ at), have before one’s eyes, have in mind (ھ s.th.)
ھدف hadaf pl. اھداف ahdāf target; aim, end, object, objective, purpose, design, intention; goal (in sports) │ ل ھدفا جعله make s.o. the target or object of …, expose s.o. to s.th.; ل ھدفا كان to be exposed, be open to ...; O حربية أھداف (ḥarbīya) military targets
ھداف haddāf sharpshooter, marksman
ھدفان hadafān (practice) target
مستھدف mustahdif exposed, open (ل to s.th.)
ھدل hadala i (ھديل hadīl) to coo (pigeon); -- i (hadf) to let down, let hang, dangle (ھ s.th.); -- hadila a (hadal) and V
to hang loosely, dangle; to flow, be wide and loose (garment)
hudl ھدل pl. hadlā’ , ھدالء f. ahdal , اھدل
hanging down loosely, flowing
مھدل muhaddal hanging down loosely, flowing
ھدم hadama i (hadm) to tear down, pull down, rue, wreck, demolish, destroy (ھ s.th.); to tear up (ھ s.th.) II to tear down, pull down, rue, wreck, demolish, destroy (ھ s.th.); to tear up, blast, blow up (ھ s.th.) V to be torn down, be razed, be demolished, be destroyed, be wiped out; to be dilapidated; to fall down, break down, collapse VII do. 1022
ھدم hadm razing, pulling down, wrecking (of a building); demolition, destruction
ھدم hidm pl. اھدام ahdām, ھدم hidam old, worn garment; pl. ھدوم hudūm clothes, clothing
ھدام haddām destructive
ھدام hudām seasickness
تھديم tahdīm wrecking, demolition, destruction, annihilation
تھدم tahaddum fall, downfall, crash, collapse, breakdown
ھادم hādim crushing, devastating, annihilating, destructive; destroyer, demolisher
مھدوم mahdūm torn down, razed, demolished, wrecked, destroyed
مھدم muhaddam and متھدم mutahaddim torn down, razed, demolished, wrecked, destroyed; in ruins, dilapidated, ramshackle, tumble-down
مستھدم mustahdim dilapidated, tumbledown (walls)
ھدن hadana i (ھدون hudūn) to be or become quiet; to calm down, quiet down III to conclude a truce (ه with s.o.)
ھدنة hudna pl. -āt calm(ness), quietness, peace, tranquility, stillness; pause, intermission, cessation; truce, armistice
ھدن hidāna truce, armistice; peace
 ھدون hudūn calm(ness), quiet(ness), peace, tranquility, stillness
مھادنة muhādana conclusion of a truce, truce negotiations
ھدھد hadhada to rock, dandle (ه a child)
ھدھد hudhud pl. ھداھد hadāhid  hoopoe (zool.)
ھدى hadā i (hady, ھدى hudan, ھداية hidāya) to lead (ه s.o.) on the right way, guide (ه s.o., ھ on a course); to guide, show, direct (ه الى
s.o. to), show (ه s.o.) the way (الى to); to lead (ه s.o., to the true faith); to supply, bring, procure (ھ s.th.); -- i (ھداء hidā’) to bring, load, conduct (ھا الى the bride to the bridegroom) III to exchange presents (ه with s.o.) IV to bring, lead, conduct (ھا الى the bride to the bridegroom); to give as a present (الى or ھ ل s.th. to s.o.), present (الى or ل s.o., ھ with), make s.o. (الى or ل) a present of (ھ); to dedicate (الى or ھ ل s.th. to s.o.), confer, bestow, award (ھ e.g., an order); to send, convey, transmit (ه ھ to
s.o. s.th.) V to be rightly guided, be led well; to get (الى to), reach (الى a place, s.th.) VI to make each other presents, exchange presents; to exchange among each other (ھ s.th., also التحية at-taḥīya to exchange greetings, greet or salute each other); to guide, load, conduct, take, bring (ه s.o.); to sway to and fro, swing rhythmically (in walking); to walk with a swinging gait; to stride; to move forward. Move on, advance; to get (الى to), reach ( الى a place); to get as far as (الى), penetrate (الى to); to flock (الى to s.o.), rally (الى around s.o.) VIII to be rightly guided, be led on the right way; to be led, be shown, be taken (الى, J to); to find the way (الى to); to find, detect, discover (الى s.th.), come upon s.th. (الى); to hit upon s.th. (الى or ل, e.g., an idea), be made aware, think (الى or ل of), arrive (الى or ل at); to be led back, find one’s way back (الى to the true faith, من away from evil); to be guided (ب by s.o.), take (ب s.o. or s.th.) as an example or model, follow s.o.’s (ب) load X to ask to be rightly guided, pray for divine guidance, seek the right way
ھدي hady guidance, direction; way, road, course, direction; manner, mode, fashion
ھدى hudan right guidance (esp., in a religious sense); guiding, leading (of 1023 s.o.); right way. true religion │ ھدى على كان to be on the right way; to embrace the true religion; ھدى غير على aimlessly, at random; ھدى غير على سار to wander aimlessly
ھدية hadya, hidya (line of) conduct, procedure, policy, course, way, direction; manner, mode, fashion
ھدية hadīya pl. ھدايا hadāyā gift, present, donation; offering, sacrifice
ھداية hidāya guidance │ ھداية غير على without divine guidance, aimlessly, at random
اھدى ahdā better guided; more correct, more proper, better
اھداء ihdā’ presentation; donation, grant(ing); award, bestowal, conferment; dedication (of a book)
ھاد hādin pl. -ūn, ھداة hudāh leading, guiding; leader, guide
مھدي mahdīy rightly guided; Mahdi
مھتد muhtadin rightly guided
ھذا hādā (dem. pron.), f. ھذه hādihī, ھذي hādī, pl. ھؤالء hā’ulā’i, dual m. ھذان hādāni, f. ھاتان hātāni this one, this │ بھذا bi-hādā hereby, herewith; لھذا li-hādā therefore, for this reason; ھذا مع herewith; in spite of it, nevertheless; ان الى ھذا (ilā an) besides, moreover, furthermore, what’s more; و ھذا besides, moreover, furthermore, what’s more; on the other hand; ويوجد ھذا (yūjadu) besides, there is ...
ھذب hadaba i (hadb) to prune, trim (ھ s.th.); to clean. purify, cleanse, smooth (ھ s.th.), polish (ھ s.th., also fig., e.g., the style) II do.; to improve, refine (ھ s.th.); to rectify, set right, correct (ھ s.th.); to check, revise (ھ s.th.); to bring up (ه a child); to educate, instruct (ه s.o.) V pass. of II
تھذيب tadīb expurgation, emendation, correction; rectification; revision; training; instruction; education, upbringing; culture, refinement
تھذيبي tahdībī of or pertaining to education, educational, educative; instructive, didactic
 تھذب tahaddub upbringing, manners, education
مھذب muhaddib teacher, educator
مھذب muhaddab well-mannered, well- bred, refined, polished, urbane, cultured, educated, well-behaved, polite, courteous
متھذب mutahaddib well-mannered, well- bred, refined, polished, urbane, cultured, educated, well-behaved, polite, courteous
ھذر hadara u i (hadr) to prattle, babble, prate, talk nonsense; to blurt out, blab (ب s.th.) II to joke, make fun, jest
ھذر hadr prattle, babble, idle talk; raillery, taunting words
ھذر hadar prattle, babble, idle talk; mockery, scoffing
ھذر hadir prattling, garrulous
ھذرم hadrama to babble, jabber, prattle, prate
ھذلول hudlūl pl. ھذاليل hadālīl  elevation, hillock; little river, small stream
ھذلولي خط kaṭṭ hudlūlī hyperbola (math.)
ھذى hadā i (hady, ھذيان hadayān) to talk irrationally, rave, be delirious
ھذاء hudā’ raving, irrational talk, delirium
ھذيان hadayān senseless jabber, rigmarole, raving, drivel, delirium; state of absennt-mindedness; folly; madness, insanity, mania, craze; hallucination
ھاذ hādin delirious, raving 1024
ھر harra i (ھرير harīr) to growl; to whimper, whine
ھر hirr pl. ھررة hirara tomcat; cat
ھرة hirra pl. ھرر hirar cat
ھرير harīr growling, growl; yelping, whining, whimper(ing); spitting (of a cat)
ھريرة huraira kitten
ھرأ hara’a a to tear, lacerate (ھ s.th.); to wear out, wear off (ھ a garment); to affect strongly, beset grievously, try, wear out, harm, hurt (ه s.o.); to irritate (ھ the skin); to he hitingly cold (wind) II to cook too much, overdo (ھ meat) IV = II; V to he overdone (meat); to he tom, lacerated VIII
to he tom, lacerated, mangled, torn to pieces; to be worn out, shabby
ھراء hurā’ prattle, idle talk
مھترئ muhtari’ overdone, boiled to shreds; torn, lacerated, mangled; worn out, shabby
ھرب haraba u (harab, ھروب hurūb, مھرب mahrab, ھربان harabān) to flee (الى to); to escape (من a danger); to desert; to run away, elope (مع with) II to help (ه s.o.) to escape; to force to flee, put to flight (ه s.o.); to liberate, free (ه a prisoner) ; to rescue (ھ a distrained or impounded thing; jur.); to engage in illicit trade, to traffic; to smuggle V to escape, elude (من s.th.); to shirk, dodge, evade (من a duty, or the like)
ھرب harab flight, escape, getaway; desertion; elopement
ھروب hurūb flight
ھربان harbān fugitive, runaway, on the run; a runaway, a fugitive, a refugee
ھراب harrāb coward
مھرب mahrab pl. مھارب mahārib  (place of) refuge, retreat, sanctuary; flight, escape, getaway │ منه مھرب ال (mahraba) inescapable, unavoidable
تھريب tahrīb illicit trade, trafficking; smuggling, smuggle, contrabandism
ھارب hārib fugitive, runaway, on the run; a runaway, a fugitive, a refugee; deserter; see also alphabetically
مھرب muharrib illicit dealer, trafficker; smuggler
مھرب muharrab pl. -āt smuggled goods, contraband
ھرج haraja i (harj) to he excited, agitated, in commotion II to make (ه s.o.) drunk, befuddle, cloud, fog, blur (ه s.o.’s mind or perceptions); to joke, make fun, jest (في in conversation)
ھرج harj excitement, agitation, commotion; disorder, muddle, confusion
│ ومرج ھرج (wa-marj) turmoil, confusion, chaos
مھرج muharrij jester, clown, buffoon
ھرجلة harjala chaos, muddle, confusion
 ھردبشت hardabašt buncombe, nonsense; trash, rubbish, junk
ھرس harasa u (hars) to crush, mash, squash, bruise, pound (ھ s.th.); to tenderize by beating, pound until tender (ھ meat)
ھرس harīsa a dish of meat and bulgur; (eg.) a sweet pastry made of flour, melted butter and sugar
ھراس harrās pl. -āt steamroller
O ھراسة آلة āla harrāsa steamroller
mahārīs  مھاريس pl. mihrās مھراس
mortar
ھرش II to sow dissension (بين between, among) III to quarrel, wrangle (ه with); to dally, joke, banter (ه with) 1025
ھرش harš scratching; wear and tear, attrition, depreciation (of tools, machinery, etc.)
ھراش hirāš quarrel, wrangle
مھروش mahrūš worn out, battered
ھرطق harṭaqa to become a heretic
ھرطقة haṭaqa heresy
harāṭiqa ھراطقة pl. harṭūqī ھرطوقي
heretic (Chr.)
ھراطقي harāṭiqī heretic (Chr.)
ھرطمان harṭamān a brand of oats
ھرع hara‘a a (hara‘) and pass. huri‘a to hurry, hasten, rush (الى to) II pass. hurri‘a and IV ahra‘a do.
ھرع hara‘ hurry, haste, rush
ھراع hurā‘ hurry, haste, rush
ھرف harafa i (harf) to praise excessively, shower with extravagant praise (ب s.th.
or s.o.)
ھرق haraqa a (harq) to shed, spill (ھ s.th.) IV do.; to sacrifice (ھ s.th.)
مھراق muhrāq poured out, spilled
مھرقان mahraqān, muhraqān, muhruqān shore, coast; ocean
اھراق ihrāq shedding, spilling │ اھراق الدماء i. ad-dimā’ bloodshed
مھرق muhraq spilled, shed; -- (pl. مھارق
mahāriq ) parchment; O wax paper
ھرقل hiraql , hirqil  Heraclius (Byzantine emperor); Hercules
ھرم harima a (haram, مھرم mahram, مھرمة mahrama) to become senile and decrepit II to mince, chop (ھ s.th.)
ھرم haram decrepitude, senility; old age
ھرم haram pl. اھرام ahrām, اھرامات ahrāmāt pyramid │ O ناقص ھرم frustum of pyramid, truncated pyramid (math.)
ھرمي haramī pyramidlike, pyramidical, pyramidal
اھرامي ahrāmī pyramidlike, pyramidical, pyramidal
ھرم harim decrepit, senile; advanced in years, aged, old; old man
ھرمس harmasa to he grave, stern, gloomy (face)
ھرمون hormōn pl. -āt hormone
ھرھر harhara to move, shake (ھ s.th.); to attack (على s.o.)
 ھرو) ھرا) harā u (harw) to cane, thrash, wallop (ه s.o.)
ھراوة harāwa pl. ھراوى harāwa stick, cane; cudgel, truncheon, club
 ھراة harāh Herat (city in NW Afghanistan)
ھروي harawī of Herat
ھرول harwala to walk fast; to burry, hasten, rush (الى to)
ھرولة harwala quick pace, haste, hurry
مھرول muharwal hurrying, speeding; in a hurry
ھري hury pl. اھراء ahrā’ granary
ھار hārin reeling, tottering, unsteady
ھز hazza u (hazz) to shake (ب or ھ s.th.); to swing, brandish, wave (ھ a lance or sword); to jolt to and fro, jog, rook (ه s.o.); to make (ه s.o.) tremble; to convulse, shake, rock, upset, sway (ھ s.th.) │ ھز كتفيه (katifaihi) to shrug (one’s shoulders); رأسه ھز (ra’sahū) to nod, shake one’s head; ذيله ھز (dailahū) to wag its tail II to shake, swing, brandish, wave (ھ s.th.) V to be moved, agitated, shaken, jolted, upset, convulsed, receive a shock; to
 move, stir, shake, sway, swing, vibrate, oscillate VIII do.; to tremble, quake, quiver; to be moved, touched, deeply affected (ل by ); to rock (rider on 1026 a camel) │ كثيرا له نھتز ال this won’t affect us greatly, this is not likely to disconcert us, this will hardly cause us any headache; فرحا اھتز (faraḥan) to tremble with joy; اھتز قلبه اليه (qalbuhū) to be elated by s.th.
ھزة hazza (n. vic.) pl. -āt motion, movement, stir, commotion, agitation; convulsion; jolt, jog, push; O (electric) shook; vibration, oscillation; tremor, shake │ ارضية ھزة (arḍīya) seismic shock, earthquake; الفرح الطرب،) السرور ھزة) (ṭarab, faraḥ) joyous excitement, delight, rapture
ھزة hizza liveliness, vivacity, high spirits
ھزاز hazzāz shaking, jolting; rocking; rolling, swinging; shaker (in concrete construction, for coal, and the like)
ھزيز hazīz bluster(ing), sough (of the wind); rumbling, roll (of thunder)
مھزة mahazza excitement, agitation
تھزيز tahzīz movement, agitation, shaking
اھتزاز ihtizāz convulsion, shock; trembling, shaking, tremor; swinging, oscillation, vibration; excitement, agitation, commotion, emotion
اھتزازة ihtizāza (n. vic.) tremor, vibration
مھتز muhtazz trembling, tremulous, shaking, quivering
ھزأ haza’a, ھزئ hazi’a a (ھزء haz’, huz’, ھزؤ huzu’, ھزوء huzū’, مھزأة mahza’a) to scoff, jeer, sneer, laugh (من or ب at), make fun ( من or ب of), deride, ridicule, mock (من or s.o.) V and X to deride, mock (من or ب s.o., s.th., also على)
ھزء haz’, huz’ and ھزؤ huzu’ derision, scorn, disdain, contempt; mockery
ھزئي huz’ī mocking, derisive
ھزأة haz’a object of ridicule, butt of derision, laughingstock
ھزأة huza’a mocker, sarcast; scorner, disdainer, despiser
مھزأة mahza’a derision, loom, disdain, contempt; mockery; scornful laughter, sneer
استھزاء istihzā’ mockery, ridicule, derision, scorn │ باستھزاء mockingly, derisively
ھازئ hāzi’ mocker, scoffer
مستھزئ mustahzi’ mocker, scoffer ھزبر hizabr, hizbar pl. ھزابر hazābir  lion ھزج hazija a to sing
ھزج hazaj name of a poetic meter
song ahāzīj  اھازيج pl. uhzūja اھزوجة
 ھزر hazara i (hazr) to laugh II (eg.) to joke, make fun, jest
ھزار hizār (eg.) joking, jesting, fun- making
 ھزار hazār pl. -āt nightingale
ھزع haza’a a (haz’), to hurry, be quick V do.
ھزع hazī’ part of the night
ھزل hazala i (hazl, huzl), hazila a (hazal) and pass. huzila to be emaciated, lean, skinny; to loss weight, become lean, skinny, emaciated; -- hazala i (hazl) to joke, talk lightly, jokingly; to cause to lose weight, make lean, emaciate, enervate (ه s.o.) II to emaciate, waste away, enervate (ه s.o.) III to joke, make fun, jest (ه with s.o.) IV to emaciate, waste away, enervate (ه s.o.) VII to be or become lean
ھزل had joking, jesting, fun
ھزلي hazlī jocular, funny, amusing, droll, humorous; humoristic; comical 1027
comedy رواية ھزلية or hazlīya ھزلية (theat.)
ھزل hazil joker, jester, funnyman, wag, wit
ھزال huzāl emaciation; leanness, skinniness
ھزال hazzāl joker, jester, funnyman, wag, wit
 ھزيل hazīl pl. ھزلى hazlā lean, skinny, emaciated
مھزلة mahzala pl. -āt, مھازل mahāzil 
comedy
ھازل hāzil joking, jocose, jocular, funny, humorous, amusing; joker, wag, wit │ ھازلة صحف (ṣuḥuf) funnies, comics
مھزول mahzūl pl. مھازيل mahāzīl  emaciated, wasted, haggard, gaunt; weak, feeble
ھزم hazama i (hazm) to put to flight, rout, vanquish, defeat (ه the enemy); to put out of action, neutralize (ه an opponent) VII to be defeated, be routed, be put to flight
ھزم hazm vanquishing, routing; defeat
ھزيم hazīma roll of thunder, rumbling, rumble, thunder; fleeing, fugitive, in flight, on the run
ھزيمة hazīma pl. ھزائم hazā’im  defeat, rout │ O الھزيمة روح rūḥ al-h. defeatism
انھزام inhizām (suffering of) defeat, frustration; rout, (disorganized) flight
انھزامي inhizāmī pl. -ūn defeatist
انھزامية inhizāmīya defeatism
ھزھز hazhaza to move, agitate, shake, jolt, shock, convulse, upset (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) II tahazhaza to be moved, agitated, shaken, convulsed, upset, receive a shock
ھزھزة hazhaza pl. ھزاھز hazāhiz  movement, agitation, shock, convulsion, commotion, disturbance
ھس hass i (hass) to whisper
ھس hass whisper, whispering; soliloquy
ھس huss hush! quiet! silence!
ھسيس hasīs whisper, whispering sound
ھستولوجيا histōlōjiyā histology
hysteria histēriyā ھيستيريا and ھستيريا
ھيستيري histērī hysteric(al)
 ھش hašša i (ھشوشة hušūša) to be crisp (bread)
-- u i (ھشاش hašāš, ھشاشة hašāša) to be in good spirits, display a cheerful mien, wear a smile; to smile (ل or ب at s.o.), meet s.o. (ل or ب) in a courteous, amiable manner, receive s.o. kindly; to cheer up (ل over or because of), be delighted (ل by); -- u to
drive away, chase away (ھ flies, and the like); -- u i (hašš) to chop off (ھ على leaves for the cattle) II to cheer up, enliven (ه s.o.), raise s.o.’s (ه) spirits
ھش hašš delicate, fragile; crisp, brittle, crumbly, friable; fresh and soft; gay, cheerful, happy, lively, brisk
ھشاش haššāš soft, crumbly, friable
ھشيش hašīš soft
ھشاشة hašāša gaiety, cheerfulness, happiness
ھاش hāšš crisp, blithe, cheerful, bright- faced │ باش ھاش (bāšš) gay and happy
 ھش hušš hush! quiet! silence!
ھشم hašama i (hašm) and II to destroy (ھ s.th.); to smash (ھ s.th.); to crush (ھ s.th.)
V and VII to be or get smashed, destroyed
ھشيم hašīm frail, fragile; dry stalks, straw, chaff
ھاشمي hāšimī Hashemite
مھشم muhaššam destroyed (city); crushed 1028
ھصر haṣara i (haṣr) to pull toward o.s., bend down (ھ s.th., e.g., a branch); to produce a crack or break (ھ in), crack, break (ھ s.th.)
ھصور haṣūr epithet of the lion
ھض haḍḍa u (haḍḍ) to walk fast, move briskly, advance, progress, get on
ھضب haḍaba i (haḍb) to be long-winded, verbose
ھضبة haḍba pl. ھضاب hiḍāb hill, elevation, mountain
ھضم haḍama i (haḍm) to digest (ھ the food; of the stomach); to oppress, terrorize, outrage, wrong, treat with injustice (ه s.o.); to stand, bear, endure (ه s.o.); to stomach ( ھ s.th.), put up with s.th. (ھ) VII to be digested VIII to oppress, wrong (ه s.o.), do (ه s.o.) an injustice
ھضم haḍm digestion; patience, long- suffering │ الجانب ھضم forbearance, compliance, indulgence; الھضم سھل sahl al-
h. easily digestible, light
ھضمي haḍmī digestive, alimentary
 ھضوم haḍūm digestible, agreeing, wholesome
ھضيم haḍīm digested; digestible; oppressed, terrorized, outraged; slender, slim
ھضيمة ha4ima encroachment, inroad, injustice, wrong, outrage, oppression
انھضام inhiḍām digestion; digestibility
مھضوم mahḍūm digested; digestible; oppressed, terrorized, outraged
ھطع IV to protrude the neck (in walking) │ العدو في اھطع (‘adw) to run fast
ھطل haṭala i (haṭl, ھطالن haṭalān, تھطال tahṭāl) to flow in torrents, fall heavily, pour down (rain) VI do.
ھطل hiṭl wolf
al-amṭār h. ھطول األمطار huṭūl: ھطول
downpour, heavy rain
ھياطل hayāṭila, ھياطلة pl. haiṭal ھيطل
hayāṭil  fox
ھف haffa i (ھفيف hafīf) to pass swiftly, flit put; to flash; to brush, touch lightly; -- i (haff, hafīf) to blow, whiffle, sough (wind); to spread, waft (fragrance) │ ھفت الى نفسه (nafsuhū) he yearned for …; ھف باله على it occurred to him all of a sudden, it flashed across his mind
ھف hiff empty; light, light-headed, thoughtless, frivolous
ھفاف haffāf flashing, sparkling, shining; blowing (wind); light, fleeting; thin and transparent, diaphanous
الھفوف al-hufūf Hofuf (chief town of al- Hasa district in E Saudi Arabia)
مھفة mahaffa fan; feather duster
مھفوف mahfūf light-headed, irresponsible, reckless, unscrupulous
ھفت hafata i (haft, ھفات hufāt) to fall down, collapse; to be nonsensical, absurd; to talk nonsense VI to pounce, rush, fall, plunge (على on or into); to crowd in (على on), throng, flock (على to), tumble one over the other, fall all over themselves; to suffer a breakdown; to cave in, collapse, break down; to be broken, wrecked,
ruined (nerves)
ھفتان haftān (eg.) weak, exhausted, spent, weakened
تھافت tahāfut collapse, breakdown │ األعصاب تھافت nervous breakdown
ھافت hāfit wrong, erroneous (opinion)
مھفوت mahfūt baffled, startled, perplexed
الھافر look up alphabetically
ھفھف hafhafa to be slender, slim; to float in the air II tahafhafa to be slender, slim 1029
ھفھفة hafhafa sough, whispering of the wind
ھفھاف hafhāf slender, slim, svelte; slight, frail, delicate; thin, sparse (e.g., beard); diaphanous, transparent, gossamery; light, weightless, defying gravity; flowing, waving, fluttering
مھفھف muhafhif slender, slim, svelte; thin
ھفو) ھفا) hafā u (hafw, ھفوة hafwa, ھفوان hafawan) to slip, commit a lapse, make a mistake; to err; to be weak with hunger, famished, starved; to hurry, rush (الى to); to reach quickly (الى for s.th.), snatch (الى at s.th.); with ب: to induce s.o. (الى to), tempt s.o. to do s.th. (ھفو) ؛(الى hafw, hufuw) to flutter, fly, float in the air; to throb violently, beat feverishly, flutter, be passionately excited, be impassioned (heart; esp., with love); to feel a desire, yearn (الى for)
ھفوة hafwa pl. hafawāt slip, lapse, error, mistake, fault, offense, sin
ھاف hāfin famished, starved
ھكتار hiktār pl. -āt hectare
ھكذا hākadā so, thus, this way, in this manner
ھيكل look up alphabetically
ھكم V to be dilapidated, ramshackle, tumble- down, to fall down, collapse; to mock, scoff; to make fun (ب or على or ه of s.o.), ridicule, deride, jeer (ه على، ب، s.o.); to be annoyed (على by), regret (على s.th.)
اھكومة uhkūma derision, mockery, taunt, gibe
تھكم tahakkum mockery, derision, scorn, irony; sarcasm
 تھكمي tahakkumī mocking, derisive, sarcastic, scornful
متھكم mutahakkim mocking, ironical
 ھل hal interrogative particle introducing direct and indirect question; also preceding the first part of an alternative question: أم -- ھل hal -- am whether -- or
ھال hallā = ال ھل is (or does) not ...? why not?
 ھل halla i (hall) to appear, come up, show (new moon); to begin, let in (month) II to say the words lā ilāha illā llāh; to shout with joy, rejoice, exult, jubilate; to applaud, acclaim, cheer (ل s.o.) IV to appear (new moon); to cheer, exult; to offer up (ب ل an animal to a deity) V to shine, gleam, glow, be radiant; to beam with joy (face); to be delighted, jubilant; to cheer. rejoice, exult, jubilate VII to fall heavily, pour down (rain); to begin (في with), take up, undertake, tackle, attack ( في s.th.), embark (في upon) X to begin, set in (new month); to raise one’s voice; to intone, strike up (ھ a tune); to begin, start (ھ a task); to open, begin, introduce, initiate (ھ ب s.th. with or by)
ھالل hilāl pl. اھلة ahilla, اھاليل ahālīl  new moon; half-moon, crescent; parenthesis; any crescent-shaped object
ھاللي hilālī lunar; crescent-shaped, lunate, sickle-shaped
ھلل halal fright, terror, dismay
تھليل tahlīl pl. تھاليل tahālīl  utterance of the formula lā ilāha illā llāh; rejoicing, exultation, jubilation; applause, acclamation, acclaim, cheering, cheers
تھلل tahallul joy, jubilation, exultation
استھالل istihlāl beginning, opening, introduction, initiation
استھاللي istihlālī incipient, initial, starting, opening, introductory, initiative
مھلل muhallal crescent-shaped, lunate 1030
متھلل mutahallil jubilant, rejoicing, exultant; radiant, beaming
مستھل mustahall beginning, start, outset
ھلب haliba a (halab) to be hairy, covered with hair
ھلب halib hairy, covered with hair; shaggy, hirsute
ھلب hulb (coll.; n. un. ة) hair, bristles
ھلب hilb pl. اھالب ahlāb anchor, grapnel, grappling iron, boat hook
hulb ھلب pl. halbā’ , ھلباء f. ahlab , اھلب
hairy, hirsute, shaggy
ھالبة hulāba lochia (med.)
مھلبية muhallabīya a dessert resembling blancmange, made of rice flour, milk and sugar
ھليلج halīlaj and اھليلج ihlīlaj myrobalan, emblic (fruit of Phyllanthus emblica L.; bot.); ellipse (geom.)
اھليلجي ihlīlajī elliptic(al)
 ھلس halasa i (hals) to emaciate, consume, waste away (ه s.o.; of a disease); pass. hulisa to be consumptive, suffer from pulmonary tuberculosis II to waste away, become lean, emaciated, haggard; to talk nonsense IV to smile
ھلس hals emaciation, wasting away; pulmonary tuberculosis, consumption, phthisis; nonsense, bosh, silly talk
  ھلوسةlook up alphabetically
ھلسنكي helsinkī Helsinki (capital of Finland)
ھلع hali‘a a (hala‘) to be impatient or restless, be anxious, be in despair
ھلع hala‘ impatience, restlessness, uneasiness; fear, burning anxiety; alarm, dismay
ھلع hal‘ impatient, restless, uneasy, anxious; dismayed, appalled
ھلوع halū‘ impatient, restless, uneasy, anxious; dismayed, appalled
ھلوف hillauf bearded; bristly
ھلقم halqama to gulp down, devour (ھ s.th.)
ھلك halaka i (halk, hulk, ھالك halāk, تھلكة tahluka) to perish; to die; to be annihilated, wiped out, destroyed II and IV to ruin, destroy (ھ s.th.) │ الحرث اھلك والنسل (hart, nasl) to destroy lock, stock and barrel VI to exert o.s., do one’s
 utmost (في in); to pounce, fall, throw o.s. ( على upon); to fight desperately (على for); to covet, crave (على s.th.); to feel enthusiasm (على for), devote o.s. eagerly (على to), go all out (على for); to become languid, tired, weak; to drop in utter exhaustion (على on); to break down, collapse VII and VIII to risk danger, imperil o.s., act desperately X to exert o.s., do one’s utmost (في in); to waste, squander, spend, exhaust, use up, consume (ھ s.th.); to discharge, pay off, amortize (ھ a debt); pass. ustuhlika to perish, die
ھلك hulk death; destruction, ruin
ھلكة halka, halaka total loss, ruin, destruction; disaster; jeopardy, perilous situation, danger
ھالك halāk total loss, ruin, destruction; perdition, eternal damnation
مھلكة mahlaka. mahluka. mahlika pl. مھالك mahālik  dangerous place, danger spot; dangerous situation; danger, peril
تھلكة tahluka ruin; jeopardy, perilous situation, danger
تھالك tahāluk enthusiasm, zeal, ardor ( على for), (vivid) interest (على in); weakness, fatigue, languor
استھالك istihlāk consumption; attrition, wear and tear; discharge, amortization
استھالكي istihlākī consumer- (in compounds; e.g., goods, prices, etc.) 1031
ھالك hālik pl. ھلكى halkā, ھلك hullak, ھالك hullāk, ھوالك hawālik perishing, dying; dead; mortal, destructible, perishable; doomed to perdition, damned; irretrievably lost, irredeemable
مھلك muhlik destructive, devastating, annihilating, scathing, withering; pernicious, ruinous, dangerous, perilous, deadly, lethal; medium of destruction or extermination
متھالك mutahālik broken down, down- and-out; exhausted
مستھلك mustahlik consumer
مستھلك mustahlak consumption
ھللويا hallilūyā hallelujah
 ھلم halumma up! get up! come! now then! come on! onward! forward! (with acc.) out with ...! bring ...! give me (us) ...!
│ اليه ھلمي (halummī) now then, go (f.) quickly to him! بنا ھلم (bi-nā) come on! let’s go! جرا وھلم (jarran) and so on, etc.
 ھلم hillam languid, listless, slack, limp
ھالم hulām jelly, gelatin
ھالمى hulāmī jellylike, gelatinous
تھلين tahlīn Hellenization
ھلھل halhala to weave finely (ھ s.th., also a poem), weave flimsily (ھ s.th.); to
wear out (ھ a garment), let it become shabby, threadbare, thin
ھلھل halhal fine; thin, flimsy; delicate ھالھل halāhil fine; thin, flimsy; delicate ھلھولة halhūla pl. ھالھيل halāhil  (eg.)
worn dress, old rag, tatters
مھلھل muhalhal thin, flimsy, gauzelike, diaphanous; finely woven (also, of a poem); worn, shabby, threadbare, tattered, ragged
ھلوسة halwasa hallucination; vision
ھليكوبتر helikoptar helicopter
ھليلج halīlaj and اھليلج ihlīlaj myrobalan, emblic (fruit of Phyllanthus emblica L.; bot.); ellipse (geom.)
اھليلجي ihlīajī elliptic(al)
ھليون hilyaun asparagus
 ھم hum they (3  pers. m. pl. of the pers. pron.)
 ھم hamma u (hamm, مھمة mahamma) to disquiet, make uneasy. fill with anxiety, distress, grieve (ه s.o.); to preoccupy, interest, regard, concern, affect (ه s.o.), be of interest (ه to s.o.); to be on s.o.’s (ه) mind, be s.o.’s (ه) concern; to worry, trouble (ه s.o.); to be important, be of importance or consequence (ه to s.o.); -- (hamm) to worry, be concerned (ب about); to have in mind, intend, plan (ب s.th., to do s.th.); to consider (ھ doing s.th.), think of doing s.th. (ه); to be about, be going ( ب بأن، to do s.th.), be on the point of doing s.th. (ب بأن،), begin to, start doing s.th. (
ب بأن،); to rise, get up IV to grieve, distress, concern, preoccupy, affect,
 regard (ه s.o.); to be on s.o.’s (ه) mind, be s.o.’s (ه) concern; to worry, trouble (ه s.o.); to be of interest (ه to s.o.), interest (ه s.o.); to be important, be of consequence, to matter VIII to be distressed, grieved, worried (ب by); to worry, be concerned (ب about); to concern o.s. (ب, occasionally also ل, with); to feel concern (ب for), take an interest (ب in); to attach importance
( to); to be interested (ب in); to look (ب after); to pay attention (ب to). take notice ( ب of), bear in mind (ب s.th.); to go to trouble, go to great lengths (ل ب on behalf of or for s.o. about s.th.); to take care (ب of s.o.), take s.o. (ب) under one’s wing, help, assist (ب s.o.); to provide (ب for); to be anxious or solicitous (ل about) 1032
ھم hamm pl. ھموم humūm anxiety, concern, solicitude; worry, care; sorrow, grief, affliction, distress; interest; intention, design, plan; important matter; weight, moment, importance, significance, consequence
ھم himm pl. اھمام ahmām, f. ھمة himma, pl. -āt, ھمائم hamā’im  decrepit, senile; old man
ھمة himma pl. ھمم himam endeavor, ambition, intention, design; resolution, determination; zeal, ardor, eagerness; high-mindedness, high-aiming ambition │ الھمة بعيد and الھمة عالي high-aspiring, having far-reaching aims; high-minded
ھمام hammām careworn, worried; anxious, solicitous; eager, active, energetic
ھمام humām pl. ھمام himām high- minded; generous, magnanimous; heroic, gallant
اھم ahamm  more important, of greater importance
اھمية ahammīya importance, significance, consequence; interest │ عديم األھمية unimportant; على اھمية علق (‘allaqa) to attach importance to; بمكان األھمية من كان عظيم (makānin) to be of the greatest importance
مھمة mahamma pl. مھام mahāmm  important matter; task, function, duty; commission, assignment, mission │ مھام
األمور important matters; المنصب مھام m. al- manṣib official duties, official functions
تھميم tahmīm lulling a baby to sleep by singing
تھميمة tahmīma lullaby
اھتمام ihtimām pl. -at concern, interest; anxiety; solicitude; care; attention; endeavor, ambition
ھام hāmm important, significant, momentous, weighty, ponderous, grave, serious; interesting
ھامة hāmma pl. ھوام hawāmm  vermin; past; reptile; see also under ھموم
مھموم mahmūm concerned, worried, anxious, distressed, grieved, sorrowful; preoccupied; interested
مھم muhimm important, significant, momentous, weighty, ponderous, grave, serious; interesting
مھمة muhimma pl. -āt important matter; pl. requirements, exigencies; equipment, material(s); stores, supplies, provisions │ حربية مھمات (ḥarbīya) war material; O متحركة مھمات (mutaḥarrika) rolling stock
مھتم muhtamm interested (ب in); concerned, anxious, solicitous (ب about); attentive (ب to), mindful (ب of)
مھتمات muhtammāt tasks, functions, duties
ھما humā both of them (3  pers. dual of the pers. pron.); see also ھمو
ھمايون humāyūnī imperial
ھمج hamija a (hamaj) to he hungry
ھمج hamai (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. اھماج ahmāj small flies, gnats; riffraff, rabble, ragtag; savages, barbarians
ھمج hamaj hunger │ ھامج ھمج ravenous hunger, voracious appetite
ھمجي hamajī uncivilized, savage; rude; barbaric, barbarous; a savage, barbarian
ھمجية hamajīya savageness, savagery; rudeness; barbarism
ھمد hamada u (ھمود humūd) to abate, subside, let up, calm down, die away, fade away, die down, cool off; to become smaller,
 shrink II and IV to quiet, calm, still, appease, placate, soothe, mitigate, alleviate, allay, stifle, quell, suppress, put out, extinguish (ھ s.th.)
ھمود humūd extinction; cooling off (of a passion, and the like); lull; fatigue, 1033 exhaustion, tiredness; motionlessness, torpor; stiffness, rigidity, rigor; death
ھامد hāmid calm, quiet, still, extinct; lifeless; rigid, stiff (corpse)
ھمر hamara u i (hamr) to pour out, shed (ھ s.th., water, tears) VII to be poured out, be shed; to pour down (rain), flow (tears)
ھمرة hamra shower of rain; growl(ing), snarl(ing)
ھمز hamaza u i (hamz) to prick; to drive, urge on, prod, goad on (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to spur ( ھ one’s horse); (gram.) to provide with hamza (ھ a letter or word)
ھمز hamz spurring, goading, prodding, urging, pressing; beating, striking, kicking; backbiting, slander │ لمز ھمز (lamz) innuendoes, defamatory insinuations; taunts, gibes, sneers
ھمز hamz glottal stop before or after a vowel (phon.)
ھمزة hamza pl. hamazāt hamza, the character designating the glottal stop: ء (gram.) │ القطع ھمزة h. al-qaṭ‘ disjunctive hamza (gram.); الوصل ھمزة h. al-waṣl conjunctive hamza (gram.); بين الوصل ھمزة the (connecting) link between ...
ھماز hammāz slanderer, backbiter
مھمز mihmaz pl. مھامز mahāmiz  spur; goad
مھماز mihmāz pl. مھاميز mahāmīz  spur; goad
ھمس hamasa i (hams) to mumble, mutter; to whisper (ب s.th., الى to s.o.) │ اذنه في ھمس (fī wajhihī) to whisper in s.o.’s ear VI to whisper together, exchange whispered remarks
ھمس hams mutter(ing), mumble; whisper(ing)
ھمسة hamsa pianissimo of a singer; whisper; pl. ھمسات hamasāt whispering, whispers
ھوامس hawāmis  mumbled or whispered words
ھمش hamaša u (hamš) to bite (ه s.o.)
ھامش hāmiš margin (of a bock, page, etc.) │ ھامش على ... on the periphery of ..., on the side lines of ..., aside from, in connection with ..., on the occasion of ..., apropos of │ األخبار ھامش على sidenotes of the news (title of a BBC news commentary)
ھامشي hāmišī marginal
ھمع hama‘a a u to shed tears (eye); to stream, flow, well
ھمك hamaka u (hamk) to urge, press (ه في s.o. to do s.th.) VII to be engrossed, be completely engaged (في in s.th.), be dedicated (في to), give o.s. up, abandon
o.s. wholeheartedly (في to, also على), be loot, become absorbed (في in), be completely taken up, be preoccupied (في with)
انھماك inhimāk wholehearted dedication, abandon, engrossment, exclusive occupation, absorption; preoccupation
منھمك munhamik engrossed, absorbed, loot (في in), taken up, preoccupied (في with); given, addicted (في to); dedicated ( في to)
ھمل hamala u i (haml, ھمالن hamalān, ھمول humūl) to be bathed in tears, shed tears (eye) IV to neglect (ھ s.th.); to omit, leave out (ھ s.th.); to disregard, fail to consider or notice, overlook, forget (ھ s.th.); to cease to use, disuse (ھ s.th.); to leave unpointed, provide with no diacritical points (ھ a consonant; gram.) VI to be careless, negligent, remiss, lazy VII to be bathed in tears, shed tears (eye); to pour down (rain)
ھمل hamal left to o.s., to one’s own devices, left alone; left untended (cattle); neglected, disregarded 1034
اھمال ihmāl negligence; neglect; dereliction of duty; carelessness, heedlessness, inattention; nonobservance, disregard, nonconsideration
ھامل hāmil pl. ھمل hummal roving, roaming; vagabond, tramp
 مھمل muhmil negligent, neglectful, remiss; careless, heedless, inattentive, slovenly
مھمل muhmal neglected; omitted; disregarded, not taken into account; obsolete, antiquated; lacking, devoid of, not provided with; without diacritical points, unpointed (gram.); المھمالت deadletter office │ اإلمضاء مھمل without signature, unsigned; مھملة رسالة dead (i.e., undeliverable) letter; المھمالت سلة sallat al-
m. wastebasket; مھملة كمية (kammīya) negligible quantity
ھملج hamlaja to amble (horse)
ھمالج himlāj pl. ھماليج hamālīj  ambler, ambling horse
ھمھم hamhama to say “hmm”; to mumble, mutter; to grumble; to growl, snarl; to hum, buzz, drone
ھمھمة hamhama pl. -āt, ھماھم hamāhim  an inarticulate utterance (“hmm, hmm”),e.g., to express astonishment, and the like; mumble, mutter(ing)j hum, buzz, drone (also. e.g., of an airplane); growl, snarl
ھمو) ھما) hamā u (hamw) to flow; to pour forth; see also alphabetically
 ھن hanna , to weep, sigh; to long, yearn (الى for)
 ھن hunna they (3  pers. f. pl. of the pers. pron.)
 ھنة hana see under ھنو
ھنا hunā and ھھنا hāhunā here, over here, in this place; hūnā (with foll. verb) there, then, now, by now, at this point │ ھنا الى or لھنا here, over here, to this place; up to here, so far, up to this point, up to this amount; ھنا من from here; of this, hereof, from this, hence; for this reason, therefore; by this, hereby; وھناك ھنا here and there
ھناك hunāka and ھنالك hunālika there, over there, in that place; there is (are) │ مأثور قول ھناك (qaul) there is a proverb; الى ھناك there, over there, to that place; ھناك من from there, from that place; ھنالك ماذا what’s up? what’s the matter?
 ھنأ hana’a u a i (ھنء han’, hin’, ھناء hanā’) to be beneficial, wholesome, healthful,
salutary, salubrious (ل or ه to s.o.), do s.o. (ل or ه) good; -- ھنئ hani’a a (ھنأ hana’) to he delighted (ب with), take pleasure (ب in), enjoy (ب s.th.) II to congratulate, felicitate (على or ه ب s.o. on or on the occasion of); to make happy, gladden, delight (ه s.o.) V to enjoy, savor (ب s.th.), take pleasure (ب in)
ھناء hanā’ and ھناءة hanā’a happiness, bliss; good health, well-being; congratulation, felicitation
ھناء hinā’ tar
ھنيء hanī’ healthful, salutary, salubrious, wholesome, beneficial; pleasant, agreeable; easy, smooth, comfortable │ لك ھنيئا or مريئا ھنيئا hanī’an marī’an approx.: may it do you much good! I hope you will enjoy it (i.e., food)!
tahāni’  تھانئ pl. tahni’a تھنئة
congratulation, felicitation
ھانئ hāni’ happy, delighted, glad; servant; ھانئة hāni’a servant girl, maid
مھنئ muhanni’ congratulator, well- wisher
الھند │ Indians (East) the India; al-hind الھند (ṣīnīya) الھند الصينية India; British البريطانية 1035
Indochina; الشرقية الھند (šarqīya) East India; الغربية الھند جزر juzur al-h. al-garbīya the Caribbean Islands, the West Indies
ھندي hindī Indian; (pl. ھنود hunūd) an Indian │ الھندي المحيط (muḥīṭ) the Indian Ocean; الحمر الھنود (ḥumr) the American Indians
مھند muhannad sword made of Indian steel
ھندب hindab, ھندباء hindibā’ wild chicory, endive (bot.)
ھنداز hindāz measure
ھندازة hindāza cubit (Eg., = 65.6 cm)
ھندسة handasa engineering; mechanical engineering; architecture, architectural engineering; army engineering; geometry; geodesy, surveying │ الھندسة علم ‘ilm al-h. geometry; الري ھندسة h. ar-riyy irrigation engineering; الزراعية الھندسة (zirā‘īya) agronomy; السطحية الھندسة (saṭḥīya) plane
 الھندسة الفراغية planimetry; geometry, stereometry; geometry, solid (farāgīya) planning; town al-mudun h. ھندسة المدن architecture; (mi‘mārīya) الھندسة المعمارية combat al-maidān h. ھندسة الميدان (kahrabā’īya) الھندسة الكھربائية engineering; engineering; electrical electrotechnics, radio al-lā-silkī h. ھندسة الالسلكي civil (madanīya) الھندسة المدنية engineering; mechanical الھندسة الميكانيكية engineering; engineering
ھندسي handasī technical, technological; geometrical; of or relative to mechanical engineering; engineering, industrial │ فرقة ھندسية (firqa) corps of engineers; القوات الھندسية (qūwāt) corps of engineers; the engineers (mil.)
above see ,ھندازة = hindāsa ھنداسة
مھندس muhandis architect; engineer; technician │ زراعي مھندس (zirā‘ī) agricultural engineer; عسكري مھندس (‘askarī) army engineer; كھربائي مھندس (kahrabā’ī) electrotechnician, electrical engineer; معماري مھندس (mi‘mārī) architect
ھندم handama to order, array, adjust (ھ s.th.); to make smart, neat, trim; to dress up, spruce up (ه s.o.)
ھندمة handama harmony; orderliness, tidiness, neatness, trimness
ھندام hindām harmony; orderliness, tidiness, neatness, trimness; attire, dress, garb │ ھندامه اصلح to adjust one’s clothes; to dress, dress up
مھندم muhandam well-ordered, well- arrayed; orderly, tidy, neat; trim, smart; well-dressed; made to measure, tailor- made (suit)
ھنشير hanšīr pl. ھناشير hanāšīr  (tun.) country estate
ھنغاري hungārī Hungarian (adj. and n.)
ھنف II to hurry, hasten, rush III and VI to laugh contemptuously, sneer; to sob, whimper
ھنا  see ھنالك and ھناك dates dried hanam ھنم 
 ھانم look up alphabetically
ھنيھة hunaiha a little while; hunaihatan for a little while
ھنھن hanhana to lull to sleep with a song (ل a baby)
ھنھونة hanhūna lullaby
ھنة hana pl. -āt, ھنوات hanawāt thing; s.th. unimportant, trifle, bagatelle; blemish, defect, fault, flaw
ھنو hinw time
ھني hanīy (= ھنيء) wholesome, delicious
ھه hih (interj.) oh! alas! woe! (also derogatorily) oh, come now! 1036
ھنا   see ھھنا
  ھو huwa he; it (3  pers. m. sing. of the pers. pron.); God; ھوذا see ذا
ھوية huwīya essence, nature; coessentiality, consubstantiality; identity; identity card (= │ (الھوية تذكرة الھوية، بطاقة الھوية اوراق aurāq al-h. identification papers, credentials; الھوية تذكرة tadkirat al-
h. (ir., syr.) identity card; ھويته عرف
(‘urifa) to be identified
ھوى see hūwa ھوة  
ھوتة hauta, hūta pl. ھوت huwat depression in the ground; chasm, abyss
ھوج hawaj folly, light-headedness, rashness, thoughtlessness
اھوج ahwaj , f. ھوجاء haujā’ , pl. ھوج hūj reckless; impatient, rash, thoughtless, harebrained, precipitate, hasty, foolhardy; violent, vehement, frantic
ھوجاء haujā’ pl. ھوج hūj hurricane, tornado, cyclone
ھود) ھاد) hāda u (haud) to be a Jew II to proceed Ilowly; to intoxicate, inebriate (ه s.o.; of wine); to make Jewish (ه s.o.) III to be indulgent, forbearing, conciliatory, considerate, complaisant, obliging (ه to s.o.); to avoid, shun (ه s.o.), stay out of s.o.’s (ه) way V to become a Jew or Jewish
الھود al-hūd the Jews, the Jewry
ھوادة hawāda forbearance, indulgence, consideration, complaisance, obligingness; clemency, leniency, gentle-
 heartedness; relaxation, mitigation (of laws)
تھويد tahwīd Judaization
مھاودة muhāwada complaisance, obligingness, indulgence, consideration │ األسعار مھاودة low pricing
متھود mutahawwid Judaized, under Jewish influence or control
متھاود mutahāwid moderate (price)
ھدج see ھودج ذا see ھوذا
ھور) ھار) hāra u (haur, ھؤور hu’ūr) to be destroyed, crash down, fall down, collapse; -- (haur) to pull down, topple, wreck, demolish, destroy (ھ s.th., esp., a building); to bring down, throw to the ground (ه s.o.) II to endanger, imperil, jeopardize, expose to danger (ه s.o.); to bring down, throw to the ground (ه s.o.) V to be destroyed, crash down, fall down, collapse; to rush headlong into danger; to be light-headed, careless, irresponsible; to elapse, pass, go by (time) VII to be demolished or torn down; to crash down, fall down, collapse; to fall apart (line of argument)
ھور haur pl. اھوار ahwār lake ھورة haura pl. -āt danger, peril ھواري hawārī pl. ھوارة hawwāra
volunteer; O short-term soldier, irregular;
الھوارة irregular troops
ھير hayyir rash, precipitate, thoughtless, ill-considered, imprudent
تھور tahawwur light-headedness, carelessness, irresponsibility; hastiness, rashness, precipitance
انھيار inhiyār crash, fall, downfall; collapse, breakdown
متھور mutahawwir rash, hasty, precipitate; frivolous, thoughtless; lightheaded, careless, irresponsible, reckless; foolhardy, daredevil
ھورمون hormōn hormone
 ھوس hawisa a (hawas) to be baffled, startled, perplexed; to be utterly confused, be at a complete 1088, be at one’s wit’s end II to
baffle, startle, perplex, confuse, bewilder, confound (ه s.o.); to delude, beguile, befool, infatuate, dazzle, blind (ه s.o.); to craze, drive crazy, render 1037 insane (ه s.o.) V to be beguiled, befooled, infatuated, dazzled, lose one’s head; to abandon o.s. completely; to be a fantast, a visionary VII to be beguiled, befooled, infatuated, dazzled
ھوس hawas foolishness, folly, craze, madness; dreaminess, visionariness, rapture, ecstasy; wild fancy, fantasy; raving madness, frenzy; infatuation, blindness, delusion
ھوس hawīs thought, idea, concept, notion
اھوسة pl. hāwīs ھاويس and hawīs ھويس
ahwisa (eg.) look, canal lock
اھوس ahwas  foolish, crazy, mad; dazzled, blind, infatuated
مھووس mahwūs (religious) visionary
مھوس muhawwas foolish, crazy, mad; dazzled, blind, infatuated
متھوس mutahawwis pl. -ūn fantast, visionary
 ھوسة hausa clamor, shouting, uproar
ھوش hawiša a (hawaš) and ھاش hāša u (hauš) to be excited, be in a state of commotion II to excite, agitate, unsettle (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to rouse, incite, stir up, inflame (ھ the mob); to sick (ھ على a dog on), set, incite (ه على s.o. against); to exert a disturbing influence (على on) III to annoy by its barking (ه s.o.; of a dog) V to get tumultuous, get excited, run riot
ھوشة hauša excitement, agitation, commotion, riot, uproar, ruckus, rumpus, row, fracas; turmoil, tumult
تھويش tahwīš excitation, agitation; incitement, instigation
مھوش muhawwaš exciting; troublemaker, agitator, rabble rouser
ھوع) ھاع) hā‘a u a (hau‘) to vomit, throw up; to retch II to make (ه s.o.) vomit V= I
ھا see hāka ھاك  
hockey ice ھوكي االنزالق │ hookey hokī ھوكي 
 ھول) ھال) hāla u (haul) to frighten, scare, terrify, appall, horrify, strike with terror (ه s.o.) II to alarm, dismay, frighten, terrify, horrify, fill with horror (ه s.o.); to threaten, menace, scare (على ب s.o. with); to wield menacingly (ب a stick); to picture (ھ s.th.) as a terrible thing, mike (ھ s.th.) appear terrible; to exaggerate, overemphasize (ھ or منعن s.th.), make much ado, make a great fuss (من about) X to deem significant (ھ s.th.); to consider terrific, appalling, tremendous (ھ s.th.); to be horrified (ھ at), be appalled, be staggered (ھ by)
ھول haul pl. اھوال ahwāl, ھؤول hu’ūl terror, fright, alarm, shook, horror, dismay; power │ الھول ابو abū l-h. the Sphinx; للھول يا yā la-l-haul oh, how terrible!
ھولة haula a terrifying thing, a fright; object of rear or terror
ھال hāl mirage, fata morgana; cardamom (spice)
ھالة hāla pl. -āt halo (around moon or sun, also, e.g., of a saint); ring around the eye; nimbus, aureole, glory
تھويل tahwīl pl. -āt, تھاويل tahāwīl  frightening, soaring, alarming, intimidation, cowing, browbeating; exaggeration; nightmare, phantom, bugbear, bogey, bugaboo; pl. تھاويل embellishments, ornamental flourishes; pleasant visions
ھائل hā’il dreadful, frightful, terrible, horrible, appalling, ghastly, awful; huge, vast, formidable, gigantic, prodigious, tremendous, stupendous; extraordinary, enormous, fabulous, amazing, astonishing, surprising; grim, hard, fierce (battle, fight)
مھول muhawwil terrible, dreadful 1038
Holland holanda ھوالنده or holandā ھوالندا
ھوالندي holandī Dutch, Hollandish; (pl.
-ūn) Dutchman, Hollander
Hollywood ھوليوود
ھوم II to nod drowsily (head of s.o. falling asleep); to doze off, fall asleep; to doze, nap V to doze off, fall asleep; to doze, nap
ھامة hāma pl. -āt, ھام hām head; crown, vertex; top, summit; see also under ھم
 ھون) ھان) hāna u (haun) to be or become easy (على for s.o.), be of little importance (على to); ان عليه ھان to attach no importance to the fact that ..., care little that ...; -- (hūn, ھوان hawān, مھانة mahāna) to be or become despicable, contemptible II to make easy, ease, facilitate (ھ على s.th. for s.o.); to represent or picture (ھ s.th., على to s.o.) as easy or as of little importance; to make light (ھ or من of), belittle, minimize, deride, flout, disparage (ھ or من s.th.) │ عليك ھون (hawwin) take it easy! don’t get excited! never mind! IV to despise (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to humble, humiliate, abase, demean, scorn, disdain, slight, treat with contempt or disdain (ه s.o.); to insult (ه s.o.) VI to consider easy (ب s.th.); to think little. make little (ب of), attach little importance (ب to), disdain, despise (ب s.th.); to be negligent, remiss, lax, careless, (في or ب in s.th.), neglect (في or ب s.th.); (with negation) not to fail (في to do s.th.), not to tire (في of doing s.th.) X استھان istahāna and استھون istahwana to consider easy (ب s.th.); to make little (ب of), esteem lightly, disesteem, underrate, undervalue ( ب s.th.); to disdain, despise (ب s.th.); to misunderstand, misjudge (ب s.th.) │ ال يستھان (yustahānu) not to be sneezed at, not to be overlooked
ھون haun ease, leisure, convenience, comfort; easiness, facility; ھونا haunan slowly, gently, leisurely, imperceptibly │ ھون على slowly, gently, leisurely, imperceptibly; ھونك على at your convenience
ھون hūn disgrace, shame, degradation, abasement
ھوان hawān despicableness, lowly, contemptible position; insignificance, negligibleness; degradation. abasement; disgrace, shame, ignominy
ھين hayyin, hain pl. -ūn, اھوناء ahwinā’ easy; insignificant, negligible, of little value; inconsiderable; unimportant; plain, simple, homely, modest │ لين ھين hain lain simple and nice
ھينة hīna easiness, facility; convenience, comfort, ease; leisure
ھوينا huwainā gentleness, mildness, kindliness; slowness, leisureliness, leisure,
 ease; الھوينا slowly, gently, leisurely, unhurriedly
اھون ahwan  f. ھوناء haunā’  easy; comfortable; -- (elative) easier; smaller, less, lesser; of less value, more worthless
│ اھونه ما (ahwanahū) how small, how worthless it is! الشرين اھون a. aš-šarrain the lesser evil
مھانة mahāna contempt, despicableness; degradation, abasement, humiliation, disgrace, shame
اھانة ahāna insult; affront, contumely, abuse
تھاون tahāwun disesteem, disdain, scorn, neglect; indifference (ب to s.th.)
استھانة istihāna disesteem, disdain, scorn, neglect; contempt
مھين muhīn insulting, abusive, offending; contemptuous, humiliating, disgraceful, ignominious, outrageous
متھاون mutahāwin negligent, remiss, lax, indifferent
مستھين mustahīn disdainer, scorner, despiser 1039
 ھاون look up alphabetically
 ھوى hawā i (huwīy) to drop, fall, tumble, fall down, come down, sink; to topple, tumble down, be upset; to swoop down (predatory bird); to pounce, fall (على upon); to blow (wind); to overthrow (ب s.o. or s.th.) │ رقبتھا على ھوى (raqabatihā) he fell in her arms, he embraced her; بمقامه ھوى (maqāmihī) to degrade s.o.; -- hawiya a ( ھوى hawan) to love (ه ,ھ s.o., s.th.); to become fond (ه ,ھ of); to like (ه ,ھ s.o., s.th.); to go in (ھ for a hobby), take up as a hobby (ھ s.th.) II to air, ventilate (ھ a room), expose to the wind or to fresh air ( ھ s.th.); to fan the air III to show o.s. complaisant (ه to s.o.), humor (ه s.o.); to flatter (ه s.o.) IV to fall down, drop; to drop (ب s.th.); to pounce, fall (على upon s.o., ب with); to lean, bend (على over); to reach (الى for), grab, grasp (الى at). make for s.th. (الى); to strive (الى for), aspire (الى to), desire (الى s.th.) │ الى بيده اھوى (bi- yadihī) to stretch out one’s hand for, reach out for V to be aired, be ventilated VI to break down, collapse; to plunge down,
throw o.s. down VII to fall down, drop; to be thrust down X to attract (ه s.o.); to seduce, tempt (ه s.o.); to entice, lure (ه s.o.); to charm, enchant, fascinate, enrapture, delight, entrance, carry away (ه s.o.)
ھوى hawan pl. اھواء ahwā’, ھوايا hawāyā love; affection; passion; inclination, liking, bent, wish; desire, longing, craving; fancy, whim, caprice, pleasure; اھواء sects, heretic tendencies │ ھواء على be convenient to s.o., please s.o.; الھوى في in love; األھواء اصحاب sectarians, dissenters
ھوة hūwa pl. -āt, ھوى huwan abyss, chasm; cave, cavern; pit, hole, ditch, trench; (fig.) gulf
ھواء hawā’ pl. اھوية ahwiya, اھواء ahwā’ air; atmosphere; wind, draft; weather, climate │ األصفر الھواء (aṣfar) the plague; طلق ھواء (ṭalq) open air; fresh air; الھواء في الطلق outdoors, in the open, in fresh air; مضغوط ھواء compressed air; الھواء سلك silk al-h. aviation; الھواء طلمبة ṭulumbat al-h. air pump
ھوائي hawā’ī airy, breezy; aerial, air- (in compounds), atmospheric(al); pneumatic; O inside (diameter, width); antenna, aerial, ھوائي سلك (silk); flighty, whimsical, capricious; ethereal; fantastic │ ھوائي دوالب wind wheel; O اطاري ھوائي (iṭārī) frame antenna; O طوقي ھوائي (ṭauqī) loop antenna; O مرتفع ھوائي (murtafi‘) elevated antenna; O مرسل ھوائي (murtafi‘) transmitting antenna; O مزدوج ھوائي (muzdawij) two-wire antenna; O ھوائي مستقل (mustaqbil) receiving antenna; O
مفرد ھوائي (mufrad) single-wire antenna
ھواء hawwā’ amateur
ھواية hawāya pl. -āt hobby, sport or art cultivated as an amateur; amateurism, amateurship
ھواية hawwāya fan; ventilator
اھوى ahwā more desirable, preferable اھوية uhwiya abyss, chasm, deep, depth مھوى mahwan, مھواة mahwāh pl. مھاو
mahāwin  abyss, chasm, gulf; place of one’s longing, object of desire; atmosphere
 مھواة mihwāh ventilator
تھوية tahwiya airing, ventilation
استھواء istihwā’ fascination, captivation; enchantment; seducement, enticement, temptation; suggestion
ھاو hāwin pl. ھواة huwāh falling, dropping, sinking; loving, in love; lover; fancier, fan, amateur; dabbler, dilettante
ھاوية hāwiya chasm, gulf, abyss, infernal depth, bottomless pit, hell 1040
 ھوية huwīya see  ھو
ھي hiya she (3  pers. sing. f. of the pers. pron.)
ھيا hayyā (interj.) up! come on! let’s go! now then!
ھيء) ھاء) hā’a i a and ھيؤ hayu’a u (ھيأة ḥai’a, ھياءة hayā’a) to be shapely, well-formed, beautiful to look at, present a handsome appearance; -- a (ھيئة hī’a) to desire, crave (الى s.th.) II to make ready, get ready, put in readiness (ھ s.th.); to prepare (ھ s.th.); to fix up, fit up, set up (ھ s.th.); to pave the way (ل for s.o., for s.th.); to arm, mobilize, get in fighting condition (mil.); to put in order, to order, array, arrange (ھ s.th.); to incline, dispose, make inclined (ل ه s.o. to), influence (ه ل s.o. in favor of) │ ل األسباب ھيأ (asbāba) to pave the way
for ...; ل ذاته ھيأ (dātahū) to prepare o.s. (at heart) for ...; ل مالئمة فرصة ھيأ (furṣatan mulā’imatan) to offer a good opportunity for ... III to agree, come to an agreement ( ه في with s.o. about); to concur (ه في with
s.o. in); to adapt o.s., adjust o.s. (ه to s.o.) V to be prepared, be in readiness, be ready, stand ready (ل for); to be armed, be prepared for war, be in fighting condition (mil.); to prepare o.s., get ready (ل for); to be possible (ل to s.o.); to be well-dressed
│ تھيأ tahayya’ make ready! (mil. command) VI to adapt themselves to one another, make mutual adjustment; to be in agreement, be agreed
ھيئة hai’a pl. -āt form, shape; exterior, appearance, guise, aspect, bearing; air, mien, physiognomy; attitude, position; situation, condition, state; group, (social) class; society, association; body, corporation; organization; board, commission, committee; corps; cadre,
skeleton organization │ المتحدة األمم ھيئة h. al-umam al-muttaḥida and األممية الھيئة (umamīya) the United Nations Organization; االجتماعية الھيئة (ijtimā‘īya) human society; الالسلكية اإلذاعة ھيئة h. al- idā‘a al-lā-silkīya broadcasting corporation; الحرب اركان ھيئة h. arkān al- ḥarb general staff; األسطول حرب اركان ھيئة (usṭūl) naval staff; برلمانية ھيئة (barlamānīya) parliamentary group; ھيئة التحكم board of arbitration; jury, committee of judges, committee of umpires (in sports), the referees (in military maneuvers); التدريس ھيئة teaching staff; faculty, professoriate (of an academic institution); حكومية) حاكمة ھيئة) (ḥukūmīya) governmental agency, authority; ھيئة دبلوماسية diplomatic corps; السعدية الھيئة (sa‘dīya) the Sa’dist Union (formerly, a political group in Egypt); طبية ھيئة (ṭibbīya) ambulance corps; نيابية ھيئة (niyābīya) representative body, parliamentary body; الھيئة علم ‘ilm al-h. astronomy
ھيء hayyi’, ھيئ hayī’ good-looking, handsome; shapely
تھيئة tahyi’a preparation; training; adaptation, adjustment, accommodation
مھايأة muhāya’a joint usufruct, use or profit sharing (Isl. Law)
O تھيؤ tahayyu’ military preparations
تھيؤ tahayyu’ (mutual) adaptation, (mutual) adjustment
مھيأ muhayya’ prepared; ready
(ھاب (ھيب hāba (1  pen. perf. hibtu) a ( ھيبة haiba, مھابة mahāba) to fear, dread (ھ، ه s.o., s.th.), be afraid (ه ھ، of); to stand in awe (ھ of), be awed (ه ھ، by); to honor, respect, revere, venerate (ه s.o.) II to make (ھ s.th.) be dreaded (الى by s.o.), make it dreadful to s.o., inspire s.o. (الى) with awe (ھ of); to make s.th. (ھ) appear dreadful or awesome (الى to s.o.); to threaten, frighten, intimidate, cow, daunt (على s.o.) IV to call out, shout (ب to s.o.); 1041 to call upon s.o. (ب), appeal (ب to s.o.); to drive, urge, rouse, egg on, encourage (الى ب s.o. to) V = I; to awe, frighten, scare, threaten (ه s.o.) VIII = I
ھيبة haiba fear, dread, awe; reverence, veneration, esteem, respect; awe-inspiring
 appearance, venerableness, gravity, dignity; standing, prestige
ھياب hayyāb timid, timorous, shy, diffident; respectful
ھيوب hayūb timid, timorous, shy, diffident; respectful; awful, fearful, dreadful; awe-inspiring, awesome, venerable
مھاب mahāb object of reverence and respect
مھابة mahāba dignity
تھيب tahayyub fear, dread; awe
مھوب mahūb and مھيب mahīb dreaded, dreadful, awful
مھيب muhīb awe-inspiring, awesome, venerable; grave, solemn, dignified
متھيب mutahayyib respectful, reverential
ھيت II to call (ب s.o.)
ھيت haita, لك ھيت (laka) come here!
ھيج) ھاج) hāja i (haij, ھيجان hayajān, ھياج hiyāj) to be astir or stirred up, be or get excited, agitated; to rise; to awaken, be awakened, spring up (desire); to be in great excitement, be very upset, be furious, indignant (على about, at); to run high, be rough, stormy (sea); -- ھاج and II to move, stir, agitate (ھ s.th.); to stir up, excite (ھ s.th.); to disturb, trouble, perturb, disquiet (ھ s.th.); to provoke, incite, stimulate (ھ s.th.); to kindle, ignite, inflame, incense (ھ s.th.); to make (ھ the blood) boil; to awaken, arouse, evoke (ھ e.g., a desire); to bring to light (ھ s.th.); to irritate, inflame (ھ an organ); to drive, urge on, spur on (ه ھ، s.o., s.th., على to); to rouse, start, scare up (ھ a bird) IV = II; V and VIII to be astir, be restive, be in a state of commotion, be disturbed, be excited, be agitated; to be awakened, be (a)roused, be scared up
ھيج excitement; agitation; commotion, disturbance, turmoil; dissension, strife; combat, battle
ھيجاhaijā and ھيجاء haijā’ fight, combat, battle, war
ھيجان hayajān excitement; agitation; commotion, disturbance, turmoil, tumult;
outburst of rage, fury, irritation, indignation, bitterness
ھياج hiyāj excitement; agitation; commotion, disturbance, turmoil, tumult; outburst of rage, fury, irritation, indignation, bitterness; raging, uproar (of the elements)
تھييج tahyīj excitation, agitation, stimulation; provocation, incitement; instigation; stirring up, fanning; incensement, inflammation; O induction (el.)
تھيج tahayyuj disturbance, commotion, turmoil; excitement, agitation; emotional disturbance; affect (jur.)
ھائج hā’ij stirring, astir, agitated, in commotion; rough, heaving (sea, waves); excited, impassioned; angry, furious, enraged │ ھائجه ھاج he became angry, he flew into a rage
مھيج muhayyaj exciting, stirring, rousing, stimulating; provocative, inciting; incendiary, inflammatory; agitator, troublemaker, incendiary, seditionary, rabble rouser; (pl. -āt) a stimulant, an excitant
muhtāj مھتاج and mutahayyij متھيج
agitated, upset, excited, impassioned
ھيدروجين hīdrōžēn hydrogen 1042
ھير II to hurl down, topple, tear down, destroy, demolish (ھ s.th.)
ھور see hayyir ھير
ھيراطيقي hīrāṭīqī hieratic (writing) ھيروغليفي hīroglīfī hieroglyphic ھيروين hīruwīn heroin (chem.)
ھيش) ھاش) hāša i (haiš) to be agitated, excited
ھيش hīš thicket, brush, scrub
ھيشة haiša excitement; commotion, turmoil, tumult, riot
ھيض) ھاض) hāḍa i: جناحه ھيض hīḍa janāḥhū his wing was broken, he wass powerless
ھيضة haiḍa summer cholera, cholera morbus; Asiatic cholera
 مھيض mahīd broken, shattered │ مھيض الجناح m. al-janāḥ broken-winged, helpless, feeble, sapless
ھيط) ھاط) hāṭa i (haiṭ) to shout, clamor, raise a din, be tumultuous
ھيط haiṭ shouting, clamor, din, uproar, ruckus
ھياط hiyāṭ shouting, clamor │ مياط ھياط (miyāṭ) tumultuous uproar, ruckus, wild shouting, tumult
ھطل see ھيطل
مھيع mahya‘ pl. مھايع mahāyi‘  broad, paved road
ھيف) ھاف) hāfa i (haif) to be parched, thirsty;
-- a (haif) to run away (slave); -- ھيف hayifa and hāfa a (haif, hayaf) to be slim, slender, slight, frail
ھيف haif parching wind
ھيف hayaf slenderness, slimness ھيوف hayūf burned up with thirst ھيفان haifān  parched; thirsty
hīf ھيف pl. haifā’ , ھيفاء f. ahyaf , اھيف
slender, slim; slight, frail, wispy
ھيكل haikal pl. ھياكل hayākil  temple; large building, edifice; altar; skeleton; framework (of a structure), frame; chassis (of an automobile); colossal, gigantic, huge
ھيكلي haikalī: ھيكلية مناورة (munāwara) cadre maneuver, skeleton exercise (mil.)
 ھيل) ھال) hāla i (hail) to pour, strew, sprinkle ( على s.th. on) II and IV do.; to pile up (ھ sand, earth; said of the wind) VII to be heaped up, be poured in a heap, fall in a heap; to rain down (bombs); to shower (ب على s.o. with), assail (على s.o., على ب s.o. with; instead of ب also accusative of a verbal noun) │ وشتما ضربا عليه انھال  (ḍarban wa-šatman) he fell upon her with blows and abusive language
ھيل hail piled-up sand │ والھيلمان الھيل (hailamān) heaps of money, enormous sums
ھيالن hayalān sand heap
al-arḍ inh. انھيال األرض inhiyāl, انھيال
landslide
 ھيول hayūl mote, atom
 ھيولى hayūlā, hayyūlā primordial matter; matter; substance
ھيولي hayūlī material (adj.)
ھيوالني hayulānī material (adj.)
ھيم) ھام) hāma i (haim, ھيمان hayamān) to fall in love (ب with); to be in love (ب with); to be enthusiastic, ecstatic, frantic, beside o.s.; to be in raptures, be crazy (ب about), be gone on (ب); to roam, rove, wander │ وجھه على ھام (wajhihī) to wander aimlessly about; وديان في ھام (widyān) approx.: he was no longer himself, he was floating in higher regions, he was beside himself, he was out of his senses; بأنظاره ھام to let one’s eyes wander; -- (ھيام huyām, hiyām) to thirst (ب for) 1043 II to confuse, bewilder, puzzle, mystify, mislead (ه s.o.); to infatuate, enchant, captivate, carry away, rob of his senses (ه s.o.; of love) X pass. استھيم ustuhīma to be infatuated, enchanted, captivated, carried away; to be passionately in love
ھيام huyām, hiyām passionate love; burning thirst
ھيوم hayūm confused, puzzled, baffled, mystified, perplexed
ھيام pl. haimā, ھيمى f. haimān , ھيمان
hiyām, madly in love; very thirsty
ھائم hā’im pl. ھيم huyyam, ھيام huyyām perplexed, mystified, baffled, puzzled, confused; out of one’s senses, beside o.s.; in love, mad with love
مستھام mustahām in love, mad with love
ھيمن haimana to say “amen”; to guard (على s.o.), watch (على over s.o.), watch narrowly (على s.o.), keep an eye on (على); to control (على s.th.)
ھيمنة haimana supervision, superintendence, surveillance; control; suzerainty, supremacy, ascendancy, hegemony
مھيمن muhaimin supervising, superintending, controlling; guardian; protector; master (على of s.th., also, e.g., of a situation)
ھون  see ھينة and ھين
 ھينم hainama to murmur softly
ھيه hīh (interj.) hey! Let’s go! step lively! look alive!
ھيھات haihātu, haihāt, haihāti but oh! far from the mark! wrong! what an idea! how preposterous! │ ان ھيھات it is absolutely out of the question that ...; كذا يفعل ان ھيھات how far he is from doing so! ھذا بين ھيھات وذاك what a difference between them! how different they are! ذلك لك وھيھات and how impossible is this to you!



و

wa 1. and; and also, and ... too │ واحد وال not one, not a single one; -- 2. (with foll. acc.) with │ واياه wa-iyyāhu with him; يتفق ال ومبادئھم (yattafiqu, mabādi’ahum) it is not in agreement with their principles; -- 3. introducing circumstantial (ḥāl) clauses: while, as, when, whereas │ يبتسم وھم قال (he said while he smiled) he said with a smile; طالعة والشمس جاء (šamsu) he arrived at sunrise; -- 4. (with foll. genit.) by (in oaths) │ وﷲ by God! – 5. (with foll. genit.) many a, how many │ شربت وكأس (ka’sin) many a cup have I emptied! how many cups I have drunk! -- أو a-wa أ
واال wa-illā (and if not), otherwise, else
وإن wa-in even if, even though, although
ولو wa-lau even if, even though, even in case that
ولكن wa-lākin, wa-lākinna (the latter with foll. acc. or pers. suffix) but, however, yet
وا toll (with the foll. noun ending in -āh) oh │ اسفاه وا wā-asafāh! oh grief! alas!
وابور (Fr. vapeur; colloq.) wābūr pl. -āt steam engine; steamer, steamship; locomotive, railroad, train; factory, mill; machine, engine, apparatus; hot plate, heater, stove
وابور البضاعة train; express وابور اكسبريس │
freight train, goods train; 1044 الركاب وابور
w. ar-rukkāb passenger train; وابور w.
ar.ri"" irrigation pump; الزلط وابور w. az- zalaṭ (eg.) steamroller; طارة وابور w. ṭāra paddle steamer; العادة وابور w. al-‘āda local train, accommodation train, way train
وات wāt watt (el.)
واحة wāḥa pl. -āt oasis
وأد wa’ada يئد ya’idu to bury alive (ھا a newborn girl) V and VIII اتأد itta’ada to be slow, act or proceed deliberately, tarry, hesitate, temporize (ل in s.th.) │ في اتأد مشيتة (mišyatihī) to walk slowly, unhurriedly, saunter
وئيد wa’ād deliberate, unhurried, slow; deliberateness; وئيدا wa’īdan slowly; gradually
تؤدة tu’ada deliberateness, slowness │ تؤدة على slowly, deliberately, unhurriedly
متئد mutta’id slow
وأر wa’ara يئر ya’iru (wa’r) to frighten (ه s.o.)
X to be frightened, be struck with terror وارسو warsō Warsaw (capital of Poland) واشنطون wāšinṭōn Washington
واط wāṭ watt (el.)
واق واق wāqwāq in the description, of Arab geographers, name of two different groups of island (one east of China, the other located in the Indian Ocean)
موئل mau’il refuge, asylum
وأم III to agree, be in agreement (ه ھ، with); to suit (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), be suited (ه ھ، to), harmonize (ه ھ، with) VI to agree, tally, humanize
وئام wi’ām agreement; unity, concord, harmony
مواءمة muwā’ama agreement; unity, concord, harmony
واه wāha, واھا wāhā (interj.) with ل or ب to express admiration: how wonderful is (are) …! with على to express regret: alas
…! too bad for ...!
واو wāw name of the letter و وئية wa’īya kettle
وبؤ waba’), وبأ( yawba’u يوبأ wabi’a وبئ
wabu’a u (وباء wabā’, وباءة wabā’a) and
 pass. وبئ wubi’a to be plague-stricken, infected, infested, poisoned, contaminated
وبأ waba’ pl. اوباء aubā’ infectious disease; epidemic
وباء wabā’ pl. اوبئة aubi’a infectious disease; epidemic
وبائي wabā’ī infectious, contagious; epidemic(al); pestilential
وبئ wabi’ and وبيء wabī’ infected, poisoned, contaminated, infested; plague- stricken, plague-ridden, plague-infected
موبوء maubū’ poisoned, contaminated, infested; infected, stricken (ب by), affected (ب with)
وبخ II to reprimand, rebuke, censure, reprove, scold, chide (ه على s.o. for)
توبيخ taubīk reproach, reproof, censure; reprimand, rebuke
وبر wabira يوبر yaubaru (wabar) to have abundant hair or wool, be covered with thick hair, be hirsute, hairy
wibār, وبار wubūr, وبور pl. wabr وبر
وبارة wibāra daman (Hyrax syriaca: zool.)
وبر wabar pl. اوبار aubār hair, fur of camels and goats (furnishing the material for tents) الوبر اھل ahl al-w. the Bedouins (as distinguished from المدر اھل)
وبر wabir covered with hair, hairy, hirsute 1045
اوبر aubar  f. وبراء wabrā’ covered with hair, hairy, hirsute
موبر muwabbar hairy, woolly
وبش wabaš trash, rubbish, bosh; pl. اوباش
awbāš rabble, riffraff
وبق wabaqa يبق yabiqu and wabiqa يوبق yaubaqu (wabaq, وبوق wubūq, موبق maubiq) to perish, go to ruin, be destroyed IV to ruin (ه s.o.); to debase, humiliate, mortify (ه s.o.)
موبق maubiq place of destruction, of perdition; prison, jail
موبقة mūbiqa pl. -āt grave offence; act of violence, crime; mortal sin
وبل wabala يبل yabilu (wabl) to shed heavy rain (sky); -- wabula يوبل yaubulu
(wabal, وبال wabāl, وبالة wabāla, وبول wubūl) to be unhealthy, unwholesome, noxious (climate, air)
وبل wabl downpour
وبال wabāl unhealthiness of the air or climate; evil consequences of a deed; harm, evil, curse
وبيل wabīl unhealthy, unwholesome (climate, food); of evil consequences, hurtful, noxious, calamitous, disastrous, pernicious
وابل wābil heavy downpour; (fig.) hail, shower │ الرصاص من وابال امطره (raṣāṣ) to shower s.o. with a hail of bullets; عليه امطر الشتم من وابال (šatm) to shower s.o. with a flood of abuse
وبه wabaha, wabiha يوبه yaubahu (wabh) and IV to heed, mind (ل or ب s.o.), pay attention (ل or ب to), take notice (ل or ب of)
وتد II to drive or ram in firmly (ھ a peg or stake); to fix, fasten, secure (ھ s.th.) │ وتد بيته في (baitihī) to stay at home
وتد watad, watid pl. اوتاد autād peg, pin; tent pin, tent peg; stake, pole
وتر watara يتر yatiru (watr) to string, provide with a string (ھ the bow); to wrong, harm (ه s.o.), cheat, dupe (ه s.o., ھ out of, with regard to) II to stretch, strain, draw tight, tighten, pull taut (ھ a rope, a musical string, and the like) III to do or perform (ھ s.th.) at intervals, intermittently, with interruptions IV to string, provide with a string (ھ the bow) V to be or become strained, stretched, tight, taut │ توترت العالقات (‘alāqāt) relations were strained VI to follow in uninterrupted succession; to repeat itself, recur
وتر witr uneven, odd (number); وترا
singly, one by one, separately
وتري watrī, witrī uneven, odd (number)
وتر watar pl. اوتار autār string (of a bow, of a musical instrument); sinew, tendon (anat.); chord (geom.); hypotenuse (geom.) │ الحساس الوتر على ضرب (ḥassās) to touch on a sensitive spot, get to the heart of a matter; صوتي وتر (ṣautī) vocal cord
 وترى watarī stringed, string- (in compounds)
وتيرة watīra pl. وتائر watā’ir  manner, way; mode, fashion; procedure, method; style; tone الوتيرة ھذه على in this manner, this way; واحدة وتيرة على in the same manner; uniformly, in unison; ھذه على استمر الوتيرة he continued in this tone
تترى tatrā one after the other, one by one, in succession, successively
توتر tawattur tension (also el. = voltage); strain │ األعصاب توتر nervousness, nervous tension; سياسي توتر (siyāsī) political tension
تواتر tawātur succession; repetition, recurrence; frequency, constancy, incessancy, continuance; persistence; frequency (el.) │ تواتر على successively, one after the other, in succession 1046
موتور mautūr one who has been wronged by the murder of a relative, hut to whom blood revenge is still denied
متوتر mutawattir stretched, strained, taut, tense, rigid, firm, tight
متواتر mutawātir successive
aorta autina اوتنة wutun وتن pl. watīn وتين
وتى III to come (ه to, upon; of s.th. pleasant), befall (ه s.o.; s.th. pleasant); to be complaisant, obliging (ه toward s.o.), oblige (ه s.o.); to be favorable, propitious ( ه to s.o.); to be convenient (ه to s.o.), suit (ه s.o.); to turn out successful, be a success (ه for s.o.); to be suited, suitable (ه to s.o.), become, befit (ه s.o.), go well with (ه); to agree (ه with; of food)
موات muwātin pleasant, agreeable, pleasing, appealing, engaging, winning, becoming: favorable, propitious
وثأ wata’a يثأ yata’u (وثء wat’ to bruise, contuse (ھ a limb); to wrench, sprain (ھ a limb); -- وثئ wati’a يثأ yata’u (وثأ wata’, وثوء wutū’) and pass. وثئ wuti’a to get bruised, be wrenched, be sprained IV = I wata’a
وثء wat’ contusion, bruise; sprain, wrench
وثاءة watā’a contusion, bruise; sprain, wrench
وثب wataba يثب yatibu (watb, وثوب wutūb, وثيب watīb, وثبان watabān) to jump, leap, spring, bound; to skip, hop, caper; to jump up, start; to jump up and run (الى to); to rush (الى to), make a rush (الى for); to jump, dash (على at s.o.), pounce, fall (على upon s.o.) 11 and IV to make (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) jump, bounce (ھ s.th.) III to pounce, fall (ھ upon s.th.) V to jump up, start; to rush, dash (الى to, at); to hop, skip, bound, leap, jump; to approach eagerly, with enthusiasm, tackle energetically (الى s.th.); to pounce (على في، upon); to awaken, recover, rise VI to jump, leap, spring, hound, make a jump; to be fast, abort, come pantingly (breathing)
وثب │ leap(ing) jump(ing), wajb وثب وثب طويل vault(ing); pole (zāna) بالزانة jump; high (‘ālin) وثب عال jump; broad ... over hurdle to تخطى وثبا من فوق
وثبة watba (n. vic.) pl. watabāt jump, leap, bound; attack; daring enterprise, bold undertaking; riae; awakening │ وثبة احساسية (iḥsāsīya) impulsive motion
وثاب wattāb given to jumping, bouncy, full of bounce; fiery, hotheaded, impetuous; dashing, daring, enterprising
مواثبة muwātaba prompt assertion of a claim in the presence of witnesses (Isl. Law)
متوثب mutawattib awakening, rising; vigorous, energetic
وثر watura يوثر yauturu (وثارة watāra) to be soft (bed); -- watara يثر yatiru (watr) to make soft, make smooth (ھ s.th., esp., the bed)
وثر watir son, snug, cozy, comfortable (bed, seat); smooth (cloth)
وثير watīr soft, snug, cozy, comfortable (bed, seat); smooth (cloth)
وثار witār soft bed
مياثر mawātir , مواثر pl. mītara ميثرة
mayātir  saddlecloth, blanket, drape
وثق watiqa يثق yatiqu (ثقة tiqa, وثوق wutūq) to place one’s confidence, put faith (ب in)) rely, depend (ب on), trust (ب in; ان من that), be confident (ب of; ان من that) │ يوثق به (yūtaqu) trustworthy, reliable; من وثق النفس to have self-confidence; -- watuqa
 يوثق yautuqu (وثاقة watāqa) to be firm, solid; to be sure, be certain (من of) II to make firm or solid, strengthen, cement, consolidate (ھ s.th.); to 1047 document, authenticate, confirm, certify (ھ s.th.), attest (ھ to), notarize (ھ s.th.), draw up a notarial deed (ھ over); to link firmly, hind closely (بين -- بين s.o. to) III to enter into  an agreement, make a treaty (ه with s.o.) │ على نفسه واثق (nafsahū) to make a firm resolution on, intend firmly to (do s.th.) IV to tie, fasten (ه ب s.th. to); to hind, tie up, fetter (ه ب s.o. with) V to he firm, consolidated, firmly established; to proceed with confidence, act trustfully (في in s.th.) X to make sure, make certain (من of), check, verify (من s.th.); to have confidence (ه in s.o.), trust (ه s.o.)
ثقة tiqa trust, confidence, faith, reliance
│ ثقة على trusting (من in), relying (من on), confident, certain, sure (من of); ثقة على ھو انه من he is certain that he ...; بالنصر ثقة (naṣr) confidence in victory; بالنفس ثقة or ثقة بنفسه self-confidence, self-reliance; ثقة اخو trustworthy; الثقة عدم ‘adam at-t. distrust, mistrust; الثقة عدم طلب (ṭalab) motion of “no confidence” (parl.); -- tiqa pl. -āt trustworthy, reliable; trustworthy person, trusted agent, informant, reliable authority or source; pl. authorities │ O عسكري ثقة (‘askarī) military expert
وثاق watāq, witāq pl. وثق wutuq tie, bond, fetter, shackle, chain (also fig.) │ شد وثاقه (šadda) to tie s.o. up. fetter, shackle s.o.
وثاقة watāqa firmness solidity, strength
وثيق watīq pl. وثاق witāq firm, strong, solid; safe, secure, dependable, reliable
وثيقة watīqa pl. وثائق watā’iq2 document, deed, writ, instruments, paper, record, voucher, certificate, receipt, policy; diplomatic note │ العظمى الوثيقة (‘uẓmā) the Magna Charta; التفويض وثيقة warrant of attorney (jur.)
اوثق autaq , وثقي wutqā firmer, stronger
mawātiq  مواثق pl. mautiq موثق
covenant, agreement, contract, treaty, pact
ميثاق mātāq pl. مواثق mawātiq  covenant, agreement, contract, treaty, pact, alliance; charter │ المتحدة األمم ھيئة ميثاق m. hai’at al-
umam al-muttaḥida the Charter of the United Nations; االعتداء عدم ميثاق m. ‘adam al-i‘tidā’ nonaggression pact
توثيق tautīq consolidation, strengthening, cementation; documentation, authentication, attestation, notarization; functions of a notary public, notariate │ الديون توثيق consolidation of debts, specif., consolidation of several government loans into an overall public debt
توثقة tautiqa security, surety, guaranty
وثاق witāq see watāq above
واثق wātiq trusting, confident, certain, sure
موثوق mautūq: به موثوق trustworthy, reliable, dependable; به موثوق مصدر من (maṣdar) from a reliable source
موثق muwattiq pl. -ūn notary public
وثل watal palm-fiber rope, manila rope, hemp rope
وثيل watīl palm-fiber rope, manila rope, hemp rope
وثن watan pl. وثن wutun, اوثان autān graven image, idol
وثني watanī idolater, pagan, heathen; pagan, idolatrous
وثنية watanīya paganism
وجب wajaba يجب yajibu (وجوب wujūb) to be necessary, requisite, obligatory, indispensable; to be incumbent, imposed, enjoined (على on), be s.o.’s (على) duty │ ان عليه وجب it is his duty to ..., he is in duty hound to ..., he has to …, he must ...; كما يجب as it should be, as it 1048 must be, comme il faut; -- (wajb, وجيب wajīb, وجبان
wajabān) to throb, beat, palpitate (heart) II to make s.th. (ھ) s.o.’s (على) duty, make s.th. (ھ) incumbent (على on s.o.), impose, enjoin (ھ على s.th. on s.o.), obligate (على ھ
s.o. to) IV to make s.th. (ھ) s.o.’s (على) duty, make s.th. (ھ) incumbent (على on), impose, enjoin (ھ على s.th. on s.o.), make necessary, obligatory, binding (ھ على s.th. for s.o.), obligate (على s.o., ھ to); to decide positively (ل ھ s.th. in favor of s.o.), adjudge, adjudicate, award, grant (ھ ل s.th. to s.o.) X to deserve, merit (ھ s.th.),
 be worthy (ھ of); to be entitled, have a title (ھ to), have a claim (ھ on); to deem necessary or obligatory (ھ s.th.) │ عمل الشكر يستوجب (šukra) an act deserving of thanks, a meritorious undertaking
وجبة wajba pl. wajabāt meal, repast; menu (syr.) │ الطعام وجبة w. aṭ-ṭa’ām meal, repast; ناشفة وجبة dry rations, emergency ration (approx.: D ration; mil.)
ايجاب ījāb obligation, liability, commitment; affirmation; confirmation, assertion; consent, assent; positive reaction, compliance; offer of contract, offer (jur.) │ ل ايجابا in conformity with, in accordance with, according to, in pursuance of; اإليجاب محل maḥall al-i. competent authority; اإليجاب مراجع the competent authorities; باإليجاب (اجاب) رد to answer in the affirmative, say yes
ايجابي ījābī positive; affirmative; active (defense)
ايجابية ījābīya positivism
واجب wājib necessary, requisite, essential, indispensable, inevitable, unavoidable, inescapable; incumbent, imperative, binding, obligatory; proper, adequate, fair; -- (pl. -āt, وجائب wajā’ib ) duty, obligation; incumbency; requirement, exigency, necessity; task, assignment │ عليك واجب it is your duty; واجبه من يرى he considers it his duty; بالواجب obligatorily; dutifully, duly; deservedly; العرض واجب w. al-‘arḍ suitable for presentation (petition, application); منزلية واجبات (manzilīya) homework (of a student)
موجوب maujūb moral obligation, dictate, injunction
موجب mūjib obligating, necessitating, requiring, inducing, motivating, causing; (pl. -āt) cause, reason, motive; need, exigency, requirement, necessity; matter of decorum, formality │ بموجب or على موجب according to, in accordance with; on the basis of, on account of; by virtue of, on the strength of; ل موجب ال (mujiba) there is no reason for ..., one need not ...
موجبة mūjiba cause, reason, motive, deed entailing certain inevitable consequences
موجب mūjab necessary, requisite, obligatory, made binding; effect, consequence; affirmative (gram.); positive (also, e.g., el.)
موجبة mujaba affirmative sentence مستوجب mustaujib deserving, worthy وجد wajada يجد yajidu (وجود wujūd) to
find (ھ s.th.); to hit upon s.th. (ھ), come across s.th. (ھ), meet with s.th. (ھ); to get, obtain (ھ s.th.); to invent, make up (ھ ھ s.th. as); to find (good, bad) (ھ s.th.); pass. wujida (وجود wujūd): to be found, be there, exist; to be; يوجد yūjadu there is (are); -- (wajd) to experience, feel, sense (ھ affections, afflictions); to suffer, be in a state of painful agitation; to love (ب s.o.), be impassioned (ب by), long ardently, languish (ب for); -- i u (wajd) to be angry ( على with), have a grudge (على against) IV to produce, evoke, provoke. engender, bring into being, originate, cause, bring about (ھ s.th.); to create, make (ھ s.th.); to achieve, accomplish, effect (ھ s.th.); to 1049 invent (ھ s.th.); to let (ه s.o.) find or obtain (ھ s.th.), get, procure (ه ھ for s.o., s.th.), furnish, supply (ه ھ to s.o. s.th.); to force, compel (ه على s.o. to) V to be passionately in love (ب with); to grieve (g or ب for) VI to show up, turn up, come; to exist, be existent, be there, be available; to affect passion
وجد wajd strong emotion, emotional upset; passion, ardor; ecstasy of love
وجدان wijdān passionate excitement; ecstasy; emotional life, psychic forces; feeling, sentiment
وجداني wijdānī emotional; psychic, mental; sentimental
وجود wujūd finding, discovery; being; existence; presence; whereabouts; stay, visit
وجودي wujūdī existential; existentialist
existentialism (falsafa) الفلسفة الوجودية │
موجدة maujida feeling, emotion, passion, excitement; anger, grudge, resentment, ill will
ايجاد ījād creation, procreation, production, origination; procuring,
 procurement, furnishing, supply; calculation, computation, evaluation
واجد wājid finding; finder; agitated, excited, upset, worried (على about); in love (ب with)
موجود maujūd found; available, on hand, existing, existent; present; living being, creature; stock, store, supply; pl.
-āt everything in existence, the creation; (com.) assets, stocks
موجد mūjid originator, author, creator
وجر wajr pl. اوجار aujār cave, cavern, grotto; den, lair, habitation
وجرة wajra, wajara pitfall
وجار wijār pl. اوجرة aujira cave (of wild animals), den, lair, burrow
ميجار mījār pl. مواجير mawājīr  bat; racket; earthen kneading trough
وجز wajaza يجز yajizu and wajuza يوجز yaujuzu (wajz, وجازة wajāza, وجوز wajūz) to be brief, succinct, terse, concise, summary IV to be concise, terse; to be brief, succinct (في or ھ in); to abridge, summarize, epitomize (ھ s.th.), make it short
وجز wajz short, brief, succinct; terse, concise, summary, compendious
وجيز wajīz short, brief, succinct; terse, concise, summary, compendious │ بوجيز العبارة briefly stated, in a few words, reduced to its essentials, in a nutshell
ايجاز ījāz shortness, brevity, succinctness; conciseness, terseness; abridgment │ ايجازا or باإليجاز in short, briefly, concisely; باإليجاز واليكھا (ilaikahā) the matter is, briefly, as follows
موجز mūjaz summarized; concise, terse; abstract, epitome; outline, brief sketch; summary, résumé
وجس wajasa يجس yajisu (wajs, وجسان wajasān) to be apprehensive, be afraid, be worried, be seized with fear IV to have presentiments, forebodings, apprehensions; to have a presentiment (ھ of), fear (ھ s.th.), be afraid, apprehensive, in dread (ھ of); to feel, sense, realize (ھ s.th.), be aware (ھ of) │ خيفة اوجس (kīfatan) to have a sensation of`fear; اوجس
الملل فيه (malala) to feel that s.o. is bored, sense s.o.’s boredom V = IV; to listen anxiously, apprehensively (ھ to); to taste, nibble, sip (ھ of s.th.) │ من شرا توجس (šarran) to regard s.th. as an evil omen
وجس wajs fear, apprehension, anxiety, concern, uneasiness
توجس tawajjus timorousness, timidity, apprehensiveness
واجس wājis disquieting thought, foreboding, evil premonition 1050
وجع waji‘a يوجع yauja‘u (waja‘) to feel pain, be in pain; to hurt, pain (ه s.o.) IV to
cause pain (ه to s.o.); to pain. hurt (ه s.o.) V to suffer pain, be in pain; to voice one’s pain, give vent to one’s pain, to lament; to feel grid, sorrow or pity, feel sorry, feel compassion (ل for s.o.), commiserate (ل with), pity (ل s.o.)
وجع waja‘ pl. اوجاع aujā‘, وجاع wijā‘ pain, ache; ailment │ السن وجع w. as-sinn toothache; بكبدك الوجع (bi-kabidika) an imprecation (lit.: may pain strike your liver!)
وجيع painful; grievous, sad
توجع tawajju‘ pain, ache; lament
موجوع maujū‘ feeling pain, in pain, aching; ailing; suffering
وجف wajafa يجف yajifu (wajf, وجوف wujūf, وجيف to be agitated, excited, troubled, in commotion; -- (wajīf) to throb, beat (heart) IV to agitate, excite, trouble, disturb (ھ s.th.); to make (ھ s.th.) tremble X to set (ھ the heart) aflutter
واجف wājif beating, throbbing (heart) │ واجف صوت في (ṣaut) in a tremulous voice
وجق wujaq (tun.) the “Oudjak” (Tunisian gendarmery)
وجاق wujāq, اوجاق ūjāq pl. وجقات wujaqāt range, cooking stove; (heating) stove; kitchen, galley; caboose; Janizary corps
وجل wajila يووجل yaujalu (wajal, موجل maujal) to be afraid, be scared; to be a coward, be craven IV to fill with fear, frighten (ه s.o.)
وجل wajal pl. اوجال awjāl fear, dread
 وجل wajil pl. -ūn, وجال wijāl fearful, apprehensive, timorous; cowardly, craven
وجم wajama يجم yajimu (wajm, وجوم wujūm) to be silent; to be speechless, dumfounded (with fear, rags, and the like); to be shy; to be despondent, dejected, depressed
وجم wajim silent, speechless, dumfounded; despondent, dejected, depressed
وجوم wujūm silence; anxious, apprehensive silence; speechlessness from indignation, speechless, indignation; despondency; shyness; anxiety, concern, sorrow
واجم wājim silent, speechless, dumfounded; despondent, dejected, depressed
وجنة wajna pl. wajanāt cheek
وجه wajuha يوجه yaujuhu (وجاھة wajāha) to be a man of distinction, belong to the notables II to raise to eminence, distinguish, honor (ه s.o.); to turn one’s face, turn, go (الى to), head (الى for); to send, dispatch (ه الى s.o. to); to aim, level ( ل or ه الى s.th. at), direct, steer, guide, channel (ل or ه الى s.th. to); to turn (ھ s.th., e.g., one’s face, one’s attention, etc., ل or الى to); to address (ھ الى a request, a question, a letter, etc., to) │ تھمة عليه وجه (tuhmatan) to rail, an accusation, bring a charge against s.o.; الى النظر وجه (naẓara) to turn one’s eyes to III to be opposite s.th. (ھ), be in front (ھ of); to face, front ( ھ a locality or toward); to meet face to face, encounter (ه s.o.); to see personally (ه s.o.), speak personally (ه to s.o.), have an interview or audience (ه with); to face (ھ e.g., a problem), be faced (ھ with), find
o.s. in the face of (ھ); to meet, counter, obviate, withstand, defy (ھ a danger); to stand up (ه to s.o.), oppose (ه s.o.); to hold one’s own (ھ against s.th.); to envisage, have in mind, consider (ھ s.th.); to declare openly, say frankly (ه بأن to s.o. that); to bring face to face. confront (ه ب s.o. with s.o., else or with s.th.) IV to 1051 distinguish, honor (ه s.o.) V to betake o.s., repair, go, wend one’s way (نحو or الى to), head (نحو or الى for), bend one’s steps (نحو or الى toward); to turn one’s face, turn (ل or الى to s.o.), face (ل or الى s.o.); to turn,
apply (الى نحو to s.o. for) VI to face each other, meet face to face VIII اتجه ittajaha to tend, be directed, be oriented (نحو or الى to. toward), be aimed, aim (نحو or الى at); to head, make (الى for), face, turn one’s face (الى toward); to turn, be turned (نحو or الى to s.o., to s.th.); to lead, go (نحو or الى to, toward; of a road); to point (نحو or الى to; of a signpost); to come to s.o.’s (ل) mind. occur (ل to s.o.; of an idea)
جھة jiha pl. -āt side; direction; region, part, section, area; district, precinct, city quarter; agency, authority; administrative agency; (tun.) administrative district; الجھات the outskirts, the outlying districts, the provinces │ جھة الى in the direction of, toward; جھة من from the direction of, from, on the part of, concerning, regarding, as to, with respect or regard to; الشمال جھة من (šamāl) from the north; جھة ومن ... جھة من ثانية) اخرى) (ukrā, tāniya) on the one
hand ... on the other hand; جھة كل من from all sides, on all sides; جھتي من for my part, as for me, I for one; الجھة ھذه من seen from this angle, under this aspect, from this viewpoint; االختصاص جھة or المختصة الجھة (muktaṣṣa) the competent authority; جھة اليسار jihata l-yasār at left, to the left, on the left side
جھوي مجلس Majlis jihawī council of an administrative district (Tun.)
وجه wajh pl. وجوه wujūh face, countenance; front, face, façade; outside; surface; right side of a fabric; dial (of a clock or watch); face, obverse (of a coin); prominent personality; exterior, look(s), appearance, guise, semblance; side; direction; intention, intent, design, purpose, aim, goal, objective, end; course, policy, guiding principle. precept; way, manner, mode, procedure, method; lesson, cause; sense, meaning, signification, purport; beginning, start, outset, first part of a given period of time; -- (pl. وجوه wujūh and اوجه aujuh) aspect; approach, point of view; viewpoint, standpoint; -- (pl. اوجه aujuh) phase (of the moon; also el.) │ 1. Adverbial phrases: وجھا apparently; لوجه) بوجه وجھا) face to face, in private, personally, directly; الوجوه من وجھا (with preceding negation) in no way (whatsoever); اإلجمال بوجه bi-w. il-ijmāl on
 the whole, by and large, in general; بوجه التقريب (وجه على) approximately, roughly, nearly; خاص بوجه or خاص وجه على (kāṣṣ) especially, in particular; عام (وجه على) بوجه (‘āmm) generally, in general; ما بوجه some way or other, somehow; in a certain way, to a certain extent; حق وجه بدون (w. ḥaqqin) without any legitimate claim, without being in the least entitled, in an entirely unlawful manner; وجه على in the manner of, in the form of, in the shape of; with regard to, concerning. about; وجھه على in his own way; in the right manner, correctly, properly, as it should be; غير على وجھه improperly, incorrectly, wrongly; ذھب وجھه على and وجھه على مضى to go one’s own way, go one’s way; الوجه ھذا على in this manner, this way, thus; اإلجمال وجه على (w. al-ijmāl) on the whole, by and large, in general; altogether, in the aggregate; التالي الوجه على in the following manner, as follows; التفصيل وجه على at great length, in detail, elaborately; الحصر وجه على (w. il- haṣr) in a condensed form, briefly stated, in a nutshell; العموم وجه على in general, generally; اليقين وجه على with certainty; في وجھه before him, in his presence; counter to him; before his (very) eyes; ﷲ لوجه for the sake of God, 1052 regardless of any reward in this life; for nothing, gratis; من وجه كل in every respect, from every point of view, on all grounds; كثيرة وجوه من from many points of view, in many respects; من الوجوه بعض in some ways; الوجوه كل من in every respect, in every way, all the way through, completely; -- 2. Verbal phrases: وجھه ابيض ibyaḍḍa wajhuhū to enjoy an excellent reputation, stand in good repute; وجھه اسود iswadda wajhuhū to fall into discredit. be discredited, be in disgrace; وجھا اخذ to win respect, gain prestige; اخذ العروسة وجه (wajha l-‘arūsa) to consummate marriage; وجھه في اھانه to insult s.o. to his face; وجھه بيض bayyaḍḍa wajhahū to make s.o. appear blameless, in a favorable light, to whitewash, exculpate, vindicate, justify s.o., play s.o. up, make much of s.o.; to honor s.o., show honor to s.o.; الطريق وجه له خال (kalā, wajhu ṭ-ṭ.) his way was unobstructed, he had clear sailing; وجھه سفه saffaha wajhahū or سود وجھه (sawwada) to expose s.o., show s.o. up, make a fool of s.o., bring s.o. into
discredit, disgrace s.o., dishonor s.o.; شوه الحقيقة وجه šawwaha wajh l-h. to distort the truth; الوظيفة وجه شوه to disgrace one’s profession or office; وعينه األمر وجه ضرب (wajha l-amr wa-‘ainahū) to touch on the very essence of a matter, hit the mark; قام فالن وجه في to stand up to s.o., take a stand against s.o.; فالن وجه من ھرب to flee from s.o.; -- 3. Nominal phrases: البحري الوجه (baḥrī) Lower Egypt; القلي الوجه (qiblī) Upper Egypt; الحال وجه the circumstances, the state of affairs, the factual situation; الشبه وجه w. aš-šibh point of resemblance; النھار وجه wajah n-nahār during the daytime; وجھين ذو كالم (kalām) equivocal statement, ambiguous words; القمر اوجه a. al-qamar the lunar phases; الناس وجوه prominent people, Leading personalities;
-- 4. ل وجه ال (wajha) there is no reason for; الصحة من له وجه ال (ṣiḥḥa) it has no validity at all
وجھي wajhī facial, of the face
وجھة wijha, wujha pl. -āt direction, trend, drift; course (of a ship); intention, design, aim, goal, objective; respect, regard; (=  النظر وجھة w. an-naẓar) angle, point of view, viewpoint, standpoint │ من الوجھة ھذه in this respect; from this point of view; اخرى وجھة من (ukrā) from a different standpoint, from another point of view; باريس وجھته he is on his way to Paris
وجاھة wajāha esteem, credit, repute, prestige, influence, standing, rank, distinction, notability; acceptability; well- foundedness, soundness, solidity, validity
│ وجاھة ذو person of rank; notable, noted, eminent, distinguished; الوجاھة اھل ahl al-
w. the notables
وجاھي wijāhī contradiotory (jur.)
وجيه wajīh pl. وجھاء wujahā’   notable, noted, eminent, distinguished; eminent man, person of note, notable; leader; excellent, outstanding; acceptable, well- founded, sound; الوجھاء the notables │ سبب وجيه (sabab) sound reason
وجيھة wajīha pl. -āt lady of high social standing; lady of society, socialite
تجاه tujāha (prep.) in front of, facing, opposite
 توجيه taujīh aiming, leveling, directing; orientation; guidance, direction; controlling, steering, channeling, leading, guiding; (methodical) instruction; (pl. -āt) directive, instruction; allocation; transfer, conveyance, assignment │ خطاه توجيه t. kuṭāhu directive, that one receives
توجيھي taujīhī: التوجيھية السنة (sana) fifth grade of a secondary school, the completion of which is prerequisite before 1053 admittance to a university (Eg.); توجيھية شھادة diploma conferred after the successful completion of the fifth grade of a secondary school, entitling the holder to admittance to a university (Eg.); طلبة التوجيھي ṭalabat at-t. fifth graders of a secondary school (Eg.)
مواجھة muwājaha opposite position, opposition; meeting; facing, anticipation, countering, obviation; encounter; confrontation; talk from person to person, personal talk; audience; interview; muwājahatan face to face, (from) person to person │ بمواجھة in his presence
توجه tawajjuh attention; favoritism, patronage
اتجاه ittijāh pl. -āt direction; inclination, bent, trend, drift; tendency; orientation; course (e.g., of a ship) │ واحد اتجاه ذو طريق one-way street; واحد اتجاه One Way Only (traffic sign)
واجھة wājiha pl. -āt face, front; outside; facade; show window │ القتال واجھة front line, fighting front
موجه muwajjih mate (naval rank; Eg.
1939)
موجه muwajjah remote-controlled, guided
متجه muttajih directed, tending, aiming (في in a direction)
متجه muttajah direction │ متجه كل في in all directions; in all fields, in every respect
وحد waḥada يحد yaḥidu (وحدة waḥda, حدة ḥida) and waḥuda to be alone, unique, singular, unmatched, without equal, incomparable II to make into one, unite, unify, standardize, regularize (ھ s.th.); to connect, join, link, unite, bring together, fit together, combine, consolidate,
amalgamate, merge (بينھم different parts) │ ﷲ وحد to declare God to he one; to profess belief in the unity of God, he a monotheist; الديون وحد to consolidate, or fund, debts V to be one, alone, by o.s., the only one, singular, unique; to be lonely, solitary, live in solitude, lead a secluded life; to do alone, perform or carry out by
o.s. (ب s.th.); to be reduced to one; to be united, be combined, be unified, be standardized, be concerted, be consolidated; to become one, form a unity
│ برأيه توحد (bi-ra’yihī) to stand alone with one’s opinion; بعنايته توحده (bi-‘ināyatihī) to single s.o. out for one’s special care, give
s.o. particular attention VIII اتحد ittaḥada to he one, form a unity; to be united, be combined, be consolidated, be amalgamated, merge, form, or join in, a union; to unite, combine (ب with); to he agreed, be unanimous; to agree, concur; to act jointly
حدة ḥida solitude, solitariness │ حدة على alone, by o.s., apart from others, detached, isolated. secluded; separate(ly); حدة على كل everyone by himself. each by himself (itself), each separately, each individually
وحده waḥdahū, f. وحدھا waḥdahā or على وحده ‘alā waḥdihī etc., he alone, he by himself │ وحده جاء he came alone; وحده ... ال بل not only ... but
وحدة waḥda oneness, singleness, unity; solitariness, isolation, seclusion, privacy, solitude, loneliness; self-containment, independence; union; -- (pl. -āt) military unit; crew; single group, grouping; plant unit, installation; (subsidiary) unit (of an industrial plant); branch office, sub-office (of an administrative agency) │ O وحدات اإلشارة w. al-išāra communications units (mil.); الزمن وحدة w. az-zaman time unit; طائفية وحدة denominational group, religious minority; العربية الوحدة (‘arabīya) Arab unity, the Arab Union
وحداني waḥdānī single, solitary, separate, individual; sole, only, exclusive; 1054 singular, unique; matchless, unequaled, incomparable; single, unmarried
وحدانية waḥdānīya soleness, solitariness; isolation, seclusion, privacy; solitude,
 loneliness; oneness, singleness, unity (esp. of God); singularity, uniqueness, incomparableness
وحيد waḥīd alone; solitary, lonely; single, separate, individual, sporadic, isolated; sale, only, exclusive; singular, unique; matchless, unequaled, incomparable │ ابويھا وحيدة w. abawaihā her parents’ only daughter
اوحد auḥad singular, unique
توحيد tauḥīd unification, union, combination, fusion; standardization, regularization; consolidation, amalgamation, merger; belief in the unity of God; profession of the unity of God; monotheism; (myst.) mergence in the unity of the universe │ الدين توحيد consolidation of debts; الزوجة توحيد t. az- zauja monogamy; الكلمة توحيد t. al-kalima unification, union, joining of forces, unanimity; المنتوجات توحيد standardization of industrial products; التوحيد علم ‘ilm at-t. (Islamic) theology
توحد tawaḥḥud soleness, singleness, solitariness; isolation, seclusion, privacy; solitude, loneliness
اتحاد ittiḥād oneness, singleness, unity; concord, accord, unison, harmony, unanimity, agreement; combination; consolidation, amalgamation, merger, fusion; alliance, confederacy; association; federation; union; O chemical compound
efforts, combined with unison, in باتحاد │ unanimity; اتحاد اآلراء jointly; together, اتحاد البريد العام unanimously; باتحاد اآلراء اتحاد جنوب Union; Postal Universal (‘āmm) South of Union the ifrīqiya janūb itt. افريقية Ad-duwal itt. اتحاد الدول العربية Africa;
al-’arabīya the United Arab States (i.e., the United Arab Republic and Yemen); السوفيت اتحاد or السوفييتي) السوفيتي االتحاد) the Soviet Union
اتحادي ittiḥādī unionist; unionistic; federal │ اتحادية حكومة federal government
واحد wāḥid one (numeral); someone, somebody, a certain person, a certain ...; sole, only; (pl. وحدان wuḥdān) single, solitary, separate, individual, sporadic, isolated واحدا واحدا or واحدا فواحدا or بعد واحد واحده or اآلخر بعد واحدا one by one, single,
separately, one after the other, one at a time, successively; الواحد the One (attribute of God); منھم الواحد each of them, every one of them; كھذا واحد such a one, such a man, (any)one like that; واحد كل kullu wāḥidin everyone, everybody; واحد موضع في (mauḍi’in) in one and the same place; وال واحد not a single one, not one; ووحدانا زرافات zarāfātin wa-wuḥdānan in groups and alone
موحد muwaḥḥid professor of the unity of God; الموحدون the Almohades
موحد muwaḥḥad combined, consolidated, amalgamated; united; unified; standardized, regularized; O unipolar (el.); having one diacritical point (letter)
متوحد mutawaḥḥid solitary, rare, sporadic, isolated; recluse, hermit
متحد muttaḥid united, combined, consolidated, amalgamated; uniform, standardized; harmonious, united, unanimous, in agreement, concordant │ المتحدة الواليات (wilāyāt) the United States; المتحدة األمم (umam) the United Nations
مستوحد mustauḥid solitary, lonely, isolated
وحش IV to be deserted, desolate (region); to oppress, make uneasy, fill with anxiety (ه s.o.); to make (ه s.o.) feel lonely, make lonesome (ه s.o.); to grieve by one’s 1055 absence (ه s.o.) V to be desolate, deserted, waste; to be or become wild, savage, brutal; to brutalize, become brutish X to be desolate, deserted, waste; to feel lonely; to be distressed, saddened by the separation (ل from s.o.), miss badly (ل s.o.); to have an aversion (من to), feel a distaste (من for), feel repelled (من by), to be unable to warm or reconcile o.s. (من to), feel no particular liking (من for), to be alienated, become estranged; to be afraid
وحش waḥš waste. deserted, lonely, dreary, desolate, wild, untamed (animal),
-- (pl. وحوش wuḥūš, وحشان wuḥšān) wild animal, wild beast; game, monster │ الضارية الوحوش (ḍāriya) the predatory animals, the beasts of prey
وحشة loneliness, forlornness, desolation, cheerlessness, dreariness; (fig.)
 chilliness, frontiness, frigidity, coldness (e.g., of relations), gloom, melancholy, weird feeling; strangeness, estrangement, alienation
وحشي waḥšī untamed, wild, brutish, savage, uncivilized, barbarous; brutal; cruel; ugly, repulsive, disgusting, directed outward, outer, external (esp., of anatomical parts) │ الوحشي الكعب (ka‘b) outer anklebone
وحشية waḥšīya wildness, savageness, ferocity, brutality, savagery, barbarity, barbarism
ايحاش īḥāš loneliness, forlornness
توحش tawaḥḥuš return to a wild or savage state, wildness, savageness, barbarity, brutalization; brutality
استيحاش istīḥāš strangeness, estrangement, alienation, unsociability; weirdness, uncanniness, eeriness
موحش mūḥiš desolate, dreary, deserted, forlorn, lonely, waste; oppressed, uneasy, anxious; weird, eerie, uncanny
متوحش mutawakkiš wild (animal), savage; barbarous, barbaric; brutal, cruel; a savage; a barbarian
مستوحش mustauḥiš wild, savage; a savage; lonesome, lonely; melancholia, gloomy, sad, unhappy
وحف waḥf luxuriant and black (hair)
وحل waḥila يوحل yauḥalu to sink in mire, get stuck in the mud; to be stuck, be stranded, come to a deadlock, be in a fix II to soil with mud, muddy (ھ s.th.), to become slimy, muddy or mucky (the ground) IV to mire (ه s.o.), make (ه s.o.) stick flit in the mud, get s.o. into a quagmire, throw s.o. in the mud V to be or become dirty, muddy, miry X = V
اوحال wuḥūl, وحول pl. waḥal waḥl, وحل
auḥāl mud, mire, slough, morass
وحل waḥil muddy, dirty, miry
موحل mauḥil muddy ground, slough; fix, predicament
موحل muwaḥḥal muddy, miry, mud- covered, mud-spattered, dirty
وحم waḥima يحم yauḥimu, يوحم yauḥamu (waḥam) to feel appetite, have a longing, a craving (ھ for), desire (ھ s.th.)
وحم waḥam a craving for certain food during pregnancy; appetite, craving, longing, ardent desire
وحام waḥām, wiḥām a craving for certain food during pregnancy, appetite, craving, longing, ardent desire
وحمى waḥmā pl. وحام wiḥām, وحامى waḥāmā craving for certain food (pregnant woman)
وحوح waḥwaḥa to tremble, shiver, shudder (من from, with)
وحى waḥā يحي yaḥī (waḥy) to inspire (الى ب s.o. with); to reveal (الى ب to s.o. s.th.) IV to inspire (الى ب s.o. with), to reveal 1056 (ب الى to s.o. s.th.; of God); to give an idea, give an impression (من of); to suggest, give rise to the idea (ان that), create the impression (ان that, as if); pass. الي اوحي ūḥiya ilayya it occurred to me, the idea suggested itself, I came to think, I was inspired X to ask s.o.’s (ه) advice, seek s.o.’s (ه) counsel, consult (ه s.o.); to let o.s. be inspired (ھ ه with s.th. by s.o.), seek inspiration (ھ ه in s.th. from s.o.); to derive, deduce (ھ من s.th. from) │ استوحى الفكرة (fikrata) to let o.s. be guided by the thought; من موعظة استوحى (mau‘iẓatan) to draw a lesson from
وحي waḥy inspiration; revelation (theol.)
ايحاء īḥā’ suggestion │ ذاتي ايحاء (dātī) autosuggestion
O واح wāḥin radio transmitter; O الواحى
radio
موح mūḥin inspiring; revealing; dispenser of revelations
mūḥayāt موحيات pl. mūḥan موحى
inspiration, revelation
مستوحى mustauḥan influenced, advised, guided, inspired (ب by); derived, deduced (من from)
وخز wakaza يخز yakizu (wakz) to sting, prick, twinge (ه s.o.); to pierce, transfix, stab to death (ه s.o.); to vex, pester, harass, beset, irritate, torment (ه s.o.)
 وخز wakz stinging, pricking; sharp, local pain, twinges │ الضمير وخز compunctions, pangs of remorse
وخزة wakza (n. vic.) sting, prick, twinge
وخزان wakzān needling, nagging
وخاز wakkāz stinging, pricking; biting, sharp, pungent, smarting, fierce, violent
واخز wākiz stinging, pricking; biting, sharp, pungent, smarting, fierce, violent
وخط wakaṭa يخط yakiṭu (wakṭ) to turn gray, make gray-haired (ه s.o.; of age)
وخم (see also  تخم) wakuma يوخم yaukumu ( وخامة wakāma) to be unhealthy (e.g., air, climate); to be unwholesome, heavy, indigestible; -- wakima يوخم yaukamu (wukm)to suffer from indigestion VIII اتخم ittakama to suffer from indigestion
تخمة tukma pl. -āt, تخم tukam surfeit; indigestion; upset stomach
وخم wakam unhealthy air; dirt, filth, squalor
وخم wakim unhealthy; unwholesome, heavy, indigestible; dirty, filthy, squalid
وخيم wakīm unhealthy; indigestible; bad, evil, dangerous, fatal, disastrous │ العاقبة وخيم of evil consequences
وخامة wakāma unhealthiness, unwholesomeness; evil nature
اوخم aukam  unhealthier; worse
مستوخم mustaukam indigestible; unwholesome │ مستوخم مجاز (majāz) tasteless metaphor (rhet.)
وخى wakā يخي yakī (waky) to intend, purpose ( ھ s.th., to do s.th.), have in mind, have in view (ھ s.th.), aim (ھ at), aspire (ھ to), be out for (ھ) II do.; to lead, guide (ه s.o.) V to intend, purpose (ھ s.th., to do s.th.), have in mind, have in view (ھ s.th.), aim ( ھ at), aspire (ھ to), strive (ھ for), be out for (ھ), put one’s mind (ھ to), set one’s mind, be intent (ھ on) │ طريقة توخى to follow a method, proceed methodically, systematically; غاية توخى to pursue an object, have an aim in mind
وخي waky pl. وخي wukīy, wikīy
intention, aim, plan
توخ tawakkin design, intent
ود wadda (1  pers. perf. wadidtu) a (wadd, wudd, widd, وداد wadād, wudād, مودة mawadda) to love, like (ه ,ھ s.o., s.th.), be fond (ه ,ھ of); to want, wish (ھ s.th., ان or لو or ان لو that s.th. be) │ ان اود ٧٥٠١ ذلك يفعل I should like him to do this, يود كما as he likes; غنيا كان لو وددت (lau, ganīyan) I wish he were rich; بعيدا نفسه ود عن (nafsahū) to wish o.s. far away from III to make friends, become friends (ه with s.o.) to show love or affection (ل or الى to s.o.); to try to gain favor (الى with), seek s.o.’s (الى)) friendship; to curry favor, ingratiate o.s. (الى with), flatter one’s way (الى into); to attract, captivate (ه) win s.o. ( ه) love or friendship VI to love each other, be on friendly terms, be friends
ود wadd, widd, wudd love, affection, amity, friendship; wish, desire │ لو بودنا كان (bi-waddinā) we should be pleased if
ود wadd, widd, wudd pl. اوداد audād, اود awudd, awidd loving; affectionate, tender; fond, attached, devoted; lover
ودي waddī, widdī, wuddī friendly, amicable
وداد wadād, widād, wudād love, friendship
ودادي wadādī amicable, friendly, of a friend
ودود wadūd favorably disposed, attached, devoted, fond, friendly
وديد wadīd favorably disposed, attached, devoted, fond, friendly
مودة mawaadda love; friendship
تواد tawādd friendly relations, good terms
ودج wadaj pl. اوداج audāj jugular vein │ انتفخت اوداجه his jugular veins swelled, i.e., he flew into a rage, he became furious; (also used in the sense of:) to become inflated with pride, swagger, bluster
وداج widāj jugular vein
ودر to endanger, imperil (ه s.o.); to waste (ھ s.th.)
ودع wada’a يدع yada’u (wad’) to put down, lodge, deposit (ھ s.th.); (usually
 only in imperf. and imp.) to let, leave; to leave off, stop, cease; to give up, omit, skip (ھ s.th. الى in order to turn to s.th. else) │ عنك دع da’ ‘anka desist! stop! دع عنك or من دعك da’ka min not to speak of ..., let alone …; ھذا من دعك (da’ka) stop that! cut it out! ھذا من دعنا (da’nā) let’s not talk about it! enough of that! نذھب دعنا let us go! محال يدع to leave room; --  wadu’a يودع yaudu’u (وداعة wadā’a) to be gentle, mild- tempered, meek, peaceable II to see off, bid farewell (ه s.o.); to take leave (ه of), say farewell (ه to s.o.) IV to put down, lay down (ھ ھ, s.o., s.th. in a place, also fig., s.th. in a book), lodge, deposit (ھ ھ s.th. in a place); to entrust (ھ ھ to s.o. s.th.); to leave (ه ھ with s.o. s.th.), give (ه ھ s.o. s.th.) for safekeeping, give s.th. (ھ) in charge of s.o. (ه), consign (ه ھ to s.o. s.th.)
│ السجن اودعه (sijna) to throw s.o. in prison X to lay down, put down, place, lodge, deposit (ھ ھ s.th. in a place); to entrust, consign, commit (ه ھ to s.o. s.th.), leave ( ه ھ s.th. with s.o.), give (ه ھ s.o. s.th.) for safekeeping, give s.th. (ھ) in charge of
s.o. (ه); to put on half pay, transfer to provisional retirement (ه an official); to store, warehouse (ھ s.th.) │ ﷲ استودعه (llāha) to commend s.o. to God’s protection; ﷲ استودعك farewell! God with you! good-by! adieu!
دعة da’a mild-temperedness, meekness, gentleness, gentle-heartedness; calm, composure, equanimity
ودع wad‘ lodging, depositing, deposition
ودع wad‘, wadā’ (coll.; n. un. ة) seashells
وداع wadā‘ farewell, leave-taking, adieu, valediction; الوداع and وداعا farewell! adieu! God with you! Good-by!
وداعة wadā‘a gentle-heartedness, gentleness, mild-temperedness, meekness, peaceableness 1058
وديع wadī‘ calm, peaceable, gentle- hearted, mild-tempered, meek
وديعة wadī‘a pl. ودائع wadā’i‘ s.th. entrusted to s.o.’s custody, trust, charge; deposited amount; deposit
ميدعة mīda‘a apron; (doctor’s) smock
توديع taudī‘ farewell, adieu, leave- taking; valediction
ايداع īdā‘ lodging, consigning, depositing, deposition │ اإليداع بطاقة deposit slip, certificate of deposit; warrant of arrest; اإليداع محضر maḥḍar al-i. official record of deposit (jur.)
استيداع istīdā‘ lodging, consigning, depositing, deposition; reserve; transfer to provisional retirement (of an official); putting on half pay (mil.) │ االستيداع في in provisional retirement; unattached, on half pay; O االستيداع مخزن makzan al-ist. depot
وادع wādi‘ consignor, depositor, deponent, lodger; gentle, mild, meek; peaceable, composed, calm; moderate; low, deep
مودع mūdi‘ consignor, lodger, depositor; gentle, mild, meek; moderate; low, deep
مودع mūda‘ lodged, consigned; deposited; deposit; لديه المودع (ladaihi) keeper, consignee, depository
مستودع mustaudi‘ depositor
مستودع mustauda‘ lodged, consigned; deposited; stored; in provisional retirement; unattached, on half pay, in reserve; -- (pl. -āt) depository, repository; store-house; warehouse, depot; O hangar; O container, reservoir, (storage) tank │ O التدريب مستودع training center (mil.)
وديقة wadīqa pl. ودائق wadā’iq  lawn, meadow
ودك wadak fat
and wadīk وديك wadūk, ودك wadik, ودك
وادك wādik fat (adj.)
ودى wadā يدي yadī to pay blood money (ه for
s.o. killed) IV to perish, die; to out off (ب s.o.; of death); to kill, destroy (ب s.o., s.th.) │ بحياته اودى (bi-ḥayātihī) to destroy s.o.’s life; بصحته اودى (bi-ṣiḥḥatihī) to ruin s.o.’s health, sap s.o.’s strength
دية diya pl. -āt blood money, wergild; indemnity for bodily injury
واد wādin pl. اودية audiya, وديان widyān valley; river valley, river bed, ravine, gorge, wadi; river; (newspaper) column │ الحبر من اودية اسال (ḥibr) to pour forth floods of ink; واد في وانتم واد في نحن we belong to
 different camps; there is a deep gulf between us, we stand worlds apart; به حوم شتى اودية في الفكر (ḥawwama, fikru šattā) approx.: his thoughts trailed off, he was thinking of s.th. else, he was absent- minded; واد في صيحة ذھب (ṣaiḥatan) to die unheard (call); وديان في ھام approx.: he was no longer himself, he was floating in higher realms, he was beside himself, he was out of his senses; واد كل في everywhere, on all sides; حلفا وادى w. ḥalfa Wadi Halfa (town in N Sudan, on Egyptian border)
(وذر) only imperf. يذر yadaru and imp. ذر dar to let, leave; to let alone, leave alone; to let be, stop, cease; to leave behind
ورب II to equivocate, express o.s. in equivocal terms (عن about) III to doublecross, dupe, outfox, outsmart (ه s.o.)
ورب warb pl. اوراب aurāb obliqueness, obliquity, slantingness; oblique direction, inclination, slope, slant, diagonal │ بالورب obliquely, slantingly, aslant; diagonally, transversely
وراب wirāb obliqueness, obliquity
مواربة muwāraba equivocation, ambiguity │ مواربة بدون or مواربة غير في unequivocally, in no uncertain terms 1059
موروب maurūb oblique, inclined, slanting, sloping; diagonal, transverse; partly open, ajar (door)
موارب muwārab ajar (door)
ورث warita يرث yaritu (wirt, ارث irt, ارثة irta, وراثة warāta, رثة rita, تراث turāt) to be heir (ه to s.o.), be s.o.’s (ه) heir; to inherit (ه or عن or ھ من s.th. from s.o.) II to appoint as heir (ه s.o.); to transfer by will, leave, bequeath, make over (ه ھ to s.o. s.th.) IV = II; to draw down, bring down (ه ھ on s.o. s.th.), cause (ه ھ s.o. s.th.) VI to have inherited (ھ s.th.); to possess as an inheritance (ھ s.th.)
ارث irt heritage, inheritance, legacy; estate (of inheritance)
ورث wirt inheritance, legacy
وراثة wirāta inheritance, legacy; hereditariness, hereditary transmission, heredity
امراض وراثية │ hereditary wirātī وراثي
hereditary diseases
وريث warīt pl. ورثاء wuratā’  beir, inheritor
تراث turāt inheritance, legacy
mawārīt  مواريث pl. mīrāt ميراث
heritage, inheritance, legacy, estate
توارث tawārut transmission by inheritance; heredity
 wurrāt وراث warata, ورثة pl. wārit وارث
inheriting; heir, inheritor
موروث maurūt inherited; handed down, transmitted, traditional; hereditary
مورث muwarrit and mūrit testator, legator
متوارث mutawārat inherited
  ورد warada يرد yaridu (ورود wurūd) to come, arrive; to appear, show up; to be found, be met with, be said (في in a book, letter, etc.), be mentioned (في in); to reach (الى or ھ a place), arrive (الى or ھ at), come to, get to, travel to; to be received (على by s.o.; letter, money, or the like), come to s.o.’s (على) hands; to accrue, come (على to s.o.; revenue, proceeds, etc.) II to make (ھ s.th.) reach (ب s.th. else or s.o.), get s.th. ( ھ) to (ب); to bring in, import (ھ s.th.); to supply, furnish, feed (ھ ب s.th. to); to deposit (ھ ب s.th. in), pay (ھ ب s.th. into) IV to make or have (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) come ( ھ or على to), bring, take (الى or ه ھ، على s.o., s.th. to); to transfer, convey, transport, move (ھ الى s.th. to a place); to import (ھ s.th.); to deposit, pay in (ھ an amount); to produce, present (ھ s.th.); to supply, furnish (ھ s.th.); to mention, state, set forth, bring up, allege, adduce, cite, quota (ھ s.th.), interpose, introduce, mention casually, drop in passing, throw in (ھ s.th., .,. in one’s speech) VI to arrive successively, come one after the other; to succeed one another, be successive, consecutive; to arrive, come in, come to hand (news, dispatches); to coincide, happen to be identical (ideas, thoughts) X to have (ھ s.th.) supplied or furnished (من by or from), buy, draw, get, procure (ھ من s.th. from); to import (ھ من s.th. from)
 ورد wird watering place; animals coming to the water; -- (pl. اوراد aurād) specified time of day or night devoted to private worship (in addition to the five prescribed prayers); a section of the Koran recited on this occasion │ طالما الذي الورد
الورد الذي يتلى في الغدو and (ṭālamā) التسبيح به wa-l-āṣāl) l-gudūw fī (yutlā واآلصال story old lame the always approx.:
بنات وردان pl. wardāna bint بنت وردان
banāt w. cockroach
وريد warīd pl. اوردة aurida, ورد wurud, ورود wurūd vein; jugular vein │ الوريد حبل ḥabl al-warīd jugular vein 1060
ورود wurūd coming, arrival, advent; receipt; appearance
مورد maurid pl. موارد mawārid  place of arrival, (place of) destination; access to the water, to a watering place; watering place; spring, well; resource, resort, expedient; place of origin, of provenience; source of income; income, revenue; supply; importation │ الدولة موارد m. ad- daula government revenues; الزيت موارد m. az-zait oil wells; المعيشة موارد m. al-ma‘īša food supply lines
موردة maurida watering place; landing place, quay, wharf
توريد taurīd pl. -āt furnishing, provision, purveyance; importation, import; supply; feed │ البضائع توريد supply of goods
ايراد īrād adduction, allegation, bringing up, mention(ing), citation, quotation; pl.
-āt importation, import; supply; revenue, income; returns, proceeds, takings, receipts; yield, gain, profit
توارد tawārud successive arrival; accidental identity of ideas
استيراد istīrād importation, import(s)
وارد wārid pl. وراد wurrād arriving; found, mentioned; newcomer, arrival; pl.
-āt imports; receipts, incomings, returns, proceeds, takings │ وصادرات واردات imports and exports
مورد muwarrid supplier, furnisher, purveyor, contractor
مستورد mustaurid importer
مستوردات mustauradāt imported goods, imports
 ورد II to blossom, be in bloom (tree); to apply rouge (ھ to), rouge, make up (ھ s.th.); to dye or color red (ھ s.th.) V to be or become red; to take on a rosy color, glow, be aglow, be flushed (cheek) VI = V
ورد ward (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. ورود wurūd
rose(s); blossoms, flowers, bloom
وردة warda (n. un.) rose; rosette; cockade; rosebush; (eg.) washer; (eg.) packing ring (of a piston)
وردي wardī roseate, rose-colored, rosy; pink
وردية wardīya rosary
وردة wurda reddish color
تورد tawarrud a reddening, red coloration
مورد muwarrad rosy, ruddy, red
متورد mutawarrid rosy
اآلوراس جبال jibāl al-aurās the Aurès Mountains (in E Algeria)
 ورش waraša يرش yarišu (warš) to interfere with s.o.’s (jo) p1&ns, thrust o.s. on s.o. ( على) II to disturb the peace, make trouble
ورش wariš lively, brisk; restless, restive
وارش wāriš obtrusive; intruder, parasite
 ورشة warša pl. -āt, ورش wiraš workshop │ اإلصالح ورشة w. al-iṣlāḥ repair shop, service station; الغسيل ورشة laundry
وروط II and IV to entangle, embroil, involve ( ه في s.o. in difficulties), put s.o. (ه) in an unpleasant situation, get s.o. in a bad fix V to let o.s. in for difficulties, get o.s. into trouble; to be entangled, be embroiled, become involved (في in) X to be entangled, be embroiled, become involved (في in)
ورطة warṭa pl. waraṭāt, وراط wirāṭ difficult or critical situation, difficulty, trouble, plight, predicament, awkward position, dilemma, fix, ja.m; embroilment, bad entanglement
تورط lawarruṭ entanglement, involvement (في in) 1061
 موروط maurūṭ in a plight, in a bad fix, in a dilemma
مورط muwarraṭ in a plight, in a bad fix, in a dilemma
ورع warifa يرع yari‘u (wara‘) and waru‘a ( وراعة warā‘a) to be pious and god-fearing V to pause (عن before), be cautious, hesitate (عن about), refrain, abstain (من ,عن from)
ورع wara‘ piety, piousness, godliness, godfearingness; caution, cautiousness, carefulness; timorousness, timidity, shyness, reserve
ورع wari‘ pl. اوراع aurā‘ pious, godly, god-fearing; cautious, careful; reticent, reserved
ورف warafa يرف yarifu (warf, وريف warīf, وروف wurūf) to stretch, extend, become long (shadow); to sprout, be green, verdant, in bloom (plant) II and IV to stretch, extend, become long (shadow)
وارف wārif extending, stretching (shadow); green, verdant, blooming; luxuriant
ورق II to leaf, burst into leaf, put forth leaves, sprout; to leaf, thumb (ھ a book); to paper (ھ a wall) IV to leaf, burst into leaf, put forth leaves, sprout
ورق waraq (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. اوراق aurāq foliage, leafage, leaves; paper; paper money, banknotes; thin sheet metal, laminated metal │ تمغة ورق w. tamga stamped paper; الرسم ورق w. ar-rasm drawing paper; مزركش ورق w. muzarkas wallpaper, paper hangings; السنفرة ورق w. as-sanfara emery paper, glass paper, sandpaper; شفاف ورق (šaffāf) tracing paper; الشاھدة ورق carbon paper; مطبوع ورق (tun.) stamped paper; عادم ورق wastepaper; ورق مقوى (muqawwan) cardboard, pasteboard; الكتابة ورق writing paper; اللعب ورق w. al- la‘b playing cards; اللف ورق w. al-laff wrapping paper; نشاش) نشاف ورق) (naššāf, naššāš) blotting paper; نقدي ورق paper money; اليانصيب ورق w. al-yā-naṣīb lottery tickets; األشغال اوراق business papers, commercial papers; االعتماد اوراق credentials; الحكومة اوراق government bonds; القضية اوراق a. al-qaḍīya court records; مالية اوراق securities, bonds;
banknotes, paper money; الموسيقى اوراق a. al-mūsīqā sheet music; نقدية اوراق (naqdīya), النقد ورق w. an-naqd banknotes, paper money; ورق على حبر (ḥibr) mere ink on paper, of no effect (e.g., treaty, agreement); المائدة على األوراق طرح to lay the cards on the table; to show one’s hand
ورقة waraqa (n. un.) leaf; petal; sheet of paper; piece of paper, slip; note; card, ticket; document, record, paper; thin metal plate, leaf of sheet metal │ البريد ورقة postcard; البنك ورقة banknote; مدموغة ورقة (madmūga) stamped sheet; لعب ورقة w. la‘b playing card; مالية ورقة banknote; bond, security; االتھام ورقة w. al-ittihām bill of indictment
ورقي waraqī: ورقية نقود paper money ورق wariq leafy, green, verdant وراق warrāq pl. -ūn paper
manufacturer, papermaker; stationer; wastepaper dealer; copyist (of manuscripts)
وراقة wirāqa papermaking, paper manufacture; stationery business, stationer’s trade
وارق wāriq leafy, green, verdant
مورق muwarriq stationer
مورق mūriq leafy
ورك wark, wirk, warik f., pl. اوراك aurāk hip, haunch; thigh
ورل waral pl. ورالن wirlān, اورال aurāl varan, monitor lizard (zool.)
ورم warima يرم yarimu (waram) to be swollen; to swell, become swollen II to 1062 cause to swell, inflate (ھ s.th.) │ انفه ورم (anfahū) to annoy, vex, irritate, infuriate s.o.; بأنفه ورم (bi-anfihī) to be puffed up, conceited, stuck-up V = I
ورم waram pl. اورام aurām swelling, intumescence, tumor │ ورم انفه في (anfihī) he is stuck-up
تورم tawarrum swelling, rising, intumescence
وارم wārim swollen
مورم muwarram swollen
ورن waran varan, monitor lizard (zool.)
 ورنش warnaša to varnish, lacquer, japan (ھ s.th.)
ورنيش warnīš varnish, lacquer, japan; shoe polish │ األرضية ورنيش w. al-ardīya floor wax
اوره aurah , f. ورھاء warhā’ stupid, dumb; cheeky, brazenfaced, impudent
وروار warwar bee eater (Meropl; zool.)
 ورى warā يري yarī (wary) to kindle, fire, take fire (lighter) II do.; to strike fire; to hide, conceal, keep secret, secrete (ھ s.th.); to allude (عن ب to s.th. with); to pretend, feign, affect, simulate (ب s.th.) III to try to keep secret (ھ s.th.); to hide, conceal (ھ ھ s.th. in); to disguise, mask (ھ s.th.) │ واراه التراب (turāba) to inhume, bury s.o. IV = I; to strike fire V to hide, conceal o.s. (من or عن from) VI do.; to disappear from the sight (عن of s.o. also األنظار عن)
الورى al-warā the mortals, mankind │ الورى خير kair al-w. the best of all men, the Prophet Mohammed
وراء warā’a (prep.) behind, in the rear of, at the back of; after; beyond, past; over and above, beside, in addition to; (adv.) warā’u behind, in the rear, at the back │ الوراء الى to the rear; backward; وراءه كان to be favorably disposed to s.o., stand behind s.o., support, back s.o.; األردن وراء ما (urdun) Transjordan; األكمة وراء ما (akama) what is at the bottom of it, what is behind it; وراءھا ما األكمة وراء there is more in it than meets the eye, there is s.th. wrong; ما البحر وراء (baḥr) overseas; الطبيعة وراء ما the supernatural, the transcendental; metaphysics; النھر وراء ما (nahr) Transoxiana; وراء من min warā’i (with foll. genit.) behind, from behind; beyond, past; over and above; by means of, through, by; الدعارة وراء من التكسب (takassub, di‘āra) professional prostitution; مقدرة وراء كانمن البشري العقل (madurati al-‘aqli al-bašarī) to be beyond the power of human comprehension
ورائي warā’ī hind, rear, back, located at the back, directed backward
اورى aurā (elative) better concealing (ل s.th.)
تورية tauriya hiding, concealment; dissemblance, dissimulation, hypocrisy; equivocation, ambiguity, double-entendre, allusion
 توراة look up alphabetically
 وز wazza u (wazz) to incite, set (ه على s.o. against)
 اوز = وز iwazz (see up alphabetically)
وزب wazaba يزب yazibu (وزوب wuzūb) to flow (water)
ميزاب mīzāb pl. ميازيب mayāzīb  drain pipe, drain; gutter, sewer; roof gutter │ السماء ميازيت انفتحت infataḥat m. us-samā’ the heavens opened their gates
وزر wazara يزر yaziru (wizr) to take upon o.s., carry (ھ a burden); -- wazira yaziru and wazira يوزر yauzaru (wizr, wazr, زرة zira) to commit a sin III to help, assist, aid, support (ه على s.o. in) IV to support, 1063 back up (ه s.o.), strengthen s.o.’s (ه) arm VI to help each other VIII اتزر ittazara to wear a loincloth; to put on (ھ a garment); to commit a sin
وزر wizr pl. اوزار auzār heavy load, burden, encumbrance; sin, crime; responsibleness, responsibility │ وزره حمله (ḥammalahū) to make s.o. bear the responsibility for s.th., make s.o. answerable for s.th.; اوزارھا الحرب وضعت waḍa‘at il-ḥarbu auzārahū the war has come to an end
وزرة wizra pl. wizarāt loincloth
وزرة wazara pl. -āt skirt, skirting (arch.)
 وزر V to become a (cabinet) minister X to appoint a (cabinet) minister (ه s.o.); to be appointed as (cabinet) minister
وزير wazīr pl. وزراء wuzarā’ (cabinet) minister; vizier; queen (in chess) │ بال وزير وزارة (bi-lā) minister without portfolio; مفوض وزير (mufawwaḍ) minister plenipotentiary (dipl.); وزير مقيم (muqīm) minister resident (Tun.); األكبر الوزير the Prime Minister (Tun.); الوزراء مجلس majlis al-w. cabinet, council of ministers; for the various departments see under وزارة
وزارة wizāra pl. -āt ministry; (rarer, also) cabinet, government │ اإلرشاد وزارة
 of Ministry al-qaumī al-iršād w. القومي وزارة االستعالمات (Eg.); Guidance National وزارة األشغال information; of ministry public of ministry (‘umūmīya) العمومية religious of ministry وزارة األوقاف works; وزارة البحرية ministry; wakf endowments,
ministry department, naval al-baḥrīya w. of ministry وزارة التجارة navy; the of at- (w. وزارة التربية والتعليم commerce; وزارة الحربية education; of ministry tarbiya)
w. وزارة الحقانية ministry; war at-tarbiya w. وزارة justice; of ministry al-ḥaqqānīya ministry; foreign al-kārijīya w. الخارجية the of ministry ad-dākilīya w. وزارة الداخلية of ministry وزارة الزراعة interior; aš- w. وزارة الشؤون االجتماعية agriculture; social of ministry al-ijtimā‘īya šu’ūn (baladīya, وزارة الشؤون البلدية والقروية affairs; and Municipal of Ministry qarawīya) w. وزارة الصحة العمومية (Eg.); Affairs Rural public of ministry al-‘umūmīya aṣ-ṣiḥḥa air aṭ-tayarān w. وزارة الطيران health; at-‘adl w. )وزارة ھلعدل )العدلية ministry;
(al-‘adlīya) ministry of justice; المالية وزارة
w. al-mālīya finance ministry; وزارة المعارف ministry of education; وزارة المواصالت w. al-muwāṣalāt ministry of communications
وزاري wizārī ministerial
وزع waza‘a يزع yaza‘u (waz‘) to curb, restrain (ه s.o.) II to distribute (ھ على s.th. among or to, ھ بين s.th. among), allot, apportion, deal out (ھ الى ھ، على s.th. to s.o.); to deliver (ھ the mail); pass. wuzi‘a to be distributed, be divided (بين among) V to be distributed; to be divided; to divide among themselves, (successively, alternately) beset and torment (ه s.o.; e.g., anxieties, sorrows, thoughts)
اوزاع auzā‘ groups or crowds of people
وزيعة wazī‘a pl. وزائع wazā’i‘ share, portion, allotment
توزيع tauzī‘ distribution (also, e.g., in motion-picture industry); division, apportionment, allotment; delivery; sale, market │ الثروة توزيع t. at-tarwa distribution
of (public) wealth; العمل توزيع t. al-‘mal division of labor; الجوائز توزيع distribution of prizes, award of prizes; األرباح توزيع distribution (or payment) of dividends;
مستعجل توزيع (musta‘jil) special delivery, express delivery (mail)
وازع wāzi‘ obstruction, obstacle, impediment
موزع muwazzi‘ distributing; distributor
1065 mailman postman, موزع البريد │
موزع muwazza‘ distributed; scattered, dispersed │ الخواطر موزع and الفكر موزع m. al-fikr absent-minded; unconcentrated, distraught, scatterbrained
وزال wazzāl genista, broom (bot.)
وزن wazana يزن yazinu (wazn, زنة zina) to weigh (ھ s.th.); to balance, equilibrate, equalize, even up (ھ s.th.); to weigh out, sell by weight (ھ ل s.th. to s.o.) III to equal in weight (ھ s.th.), be of the same weight as (ھ), be balanced (ھ with), equilibrate, counterbalance (ھ s.th.); to outweigh (ھ s.th.), compensate, make up ( ھ for); to balance, equilibrate, poise (بين two things); to compare (و – بين s.th. with), weigh one thing against the other; to make a comparison, draw a parallel (وبين -- بين between -- and); to distribute equally (ھ s.th.) VI to be balanced, be in equilibrium, be counterpoised, be in equipoise
زنة zina weighing; weight
وزن wazn pl. اوزان auzān weight; (poetic) measure, meter; noun or verb pattern, form (gram.); tonnage of a vessel); weight, weight class (in boxing, etc.) │ له وزن ال (wazna) or الوزن عديم imponderable; insignificant, of no consequence, negligible; ل كبيرا وزنا اقام to attach great importance to, set great store by; والكيل الوزن مصلحة maṣlaḥat al-w. wa-l- kail bureau of standards; الديك وزن w. ad- dīk bantamweight (boxing); الفارغ الوزن dead weight
وزنة wazna pl. wazanāt weight; gold or silver talent; (Ir.) weight of about 100 kg (varying; officially 10s.835 kg) │ وزنة اضافية (idāfīya) additional weight, overweight
وزني waznī weight- (in compounds), of weight; ponderable, appreciable; weighty, ponderous, grave
وزان wizāna (prep.) commensurate with, corresponding to, in conformity
 with, in analogy to, following the model or pattern of
وزين wazīn weighty, ponderous │ وزين الرأي of sound judgment, judicious
ميزان mīzān pl. موازين mawāzīn  balance, scales; weight; measure; poetic measure, meter; rule, method; justice, equity, fairness, impartiality; الميزان Libra, Balance (astron.) │ الحرارة ميزان m. al- ḥarāra thermometer; راصد ميزان self- registering scales; طبلي ميزان (ṭablī) weighing machine, platform scale; weighbridge; الماء ميزان spirit level, level
ميزانية mīzānīya balance, equilibrium, equipoise; balance (com.); budget │ ميزانية ملحقة (mulḥaqa) supplementary budget
موازنة muwāzana equality of weight, balance, equilibrium, equipoise; outweighing; counterbalance, counterpoise, counterweight, compensation; stabilizing effect; comparing, weighing; comparison, parallel (بين between); budget; (tun.) timetable, schedule
توازن tawāzun balance, equilibrium, equipoise; poise, balance; balancing, poising │ سياسي توازن (siyāsī) political balance; القوى توازن t. al-quwā balance of power; بين التوازن اعاد to restore the balance between
اتزان ittizān balance, equilibrium, equipoise; mental health; harmony; impartiality
وازن wāzin weighing; of full weight; drunk, tight
موزون mauzūn weighed; of full weight; balanced, in equilibrium, evenly poised; well-considered, well-advised, deliberate; well-balanced, well-proportioned, well- measured; rhythmically balanced; of sound judgment, judicious 1065
موازن muwāzin outweighing, counterbalancing, equal, equivalent
متوازن mutawāzin balanced, in equilibrium
متزن muttazin balanced, measured, regular; well-balanced, harmonious (in color, and the like)
وزى III to be parallel (ھ to s.th.); to be opposite s.th. (ھ), be the counterpart (ھ of); to correspond, amount, be equal or equivalent (ھ to), equal (ھ s.th.) VI to be parallel, run side by side; to be mutually corresponding, be equivalent
موازاة muwāzāh equal distance; parallelism; equivalence
تواز tawāzin equal distance; parallelism; equivalence │ التوازي على side by side, parallel
مواز muwāzin parallel; equivalent
O │ similar parallel; mutawāzin متواز متوازي O parallelogram; متوازي األضالع parallelepiped السطوح
وسخ wasaka يوسخ yausaku (wasak) to be or become dirty II and IV to dirty, soil, sully, stain, foul (ھ s.th.) V and VIII اتسخ ittasaka = I
وسخ pl. اوساخ ausāk dirt; filth, squalor
وسخ wasik dirty, filthy, soiled, sullied, unclean
وساخة wasāka dirtiness, filthiness, uncleanness, dirt, filth, squalor
وسد II to put under s.o.’s (ه) head (ھ pillow), rest, lay (ه ھ s.o.’s head on), bed (ه ھ s.o. on) │ التراب وسده (turāba) to lay s.o. or s.th. to rest in the ground; صدره وسده (ṣadrahū) to take s.o. to one’s breast, hug
s.o. V to lay one’s head on a pillow (ھ); to rest or recline on a pillow or cushion (ھ)
وساد wasād, wusād, wisād pl. وسد wusūd pillow, cushion │ الوساد لزم lazima l-wasāda to be confined to bed
وسادة wisāda pl. -āt, وسائد wasā’id 
pillow, cushion
موسد muwassad easy, smooth, paved (way)
يسر see موسر
وسط II to place, put, or set in the middle (ھ s.th.); to choose or appoint as mediator (
ه بين s.o. between) V to be in the middle or center (iJ of); to stand in the middle, keep to the middle, hold the middle between two extremes, steer a middle course; to mediate (ل ب for s.o. s.th.; بين between), act as mediator or go-between (في in)
 وسط wasaṭ, وسط pl. اوساط ausāṭ middle; center, heart; waist; milieu, environment, surroundings, sphere; means, instrument, agent, medium; mediocrity, medium quality, average; pl. circles, quarters, classes, strata (of the population; -- wasaṭ pl. اوساط ausāṭ median, medial, middle, central; in the middle, middle-of-the-road, moderate; intermediate (between two extremes); middling, mediocre, coverage, mean, medium; -- wasṭa (prep.) in the middle, heart, or center of, in the midst of, amid, among │ من وسط في (wasaṭin) in the middle or midst of, within; الوسط في in the very center; midway; of medium quality; وسطنا في in our midst, among us; وسط الصيف midsummer; وسط حجم (ḥajm) medium size; وسط حل (ḥall) middle solution, middle course, compromise; الوسط السيرة (sīra) medium pace; a moderate, neutral attitude; الدبلوماسية األوساط diplomatic circles; العامة األوساط (‘āmma) the general public, the public at large; الناس اوساط the middle classes 1066
وسطي wasaṭī of or relative to the milieu or environment
وسطاني wasṭānī middle, central, medial, median; intermediate; middling, medium, mediocre
وسطية wasṭīya pl. -āt patio, inner courtyard
وساطة wisāṭa mediation, intervention; good offices, recommendation, intercession │ بوساطة by means of, through, by, per; فالن وساطة عن through the good offices of s.o. وساطته قدم to offer one’s good offices for
وسيط wasīṭ pl. وسطاء middle, intermediary, intermediate, medial, median; mediator, intercessor; intermediary; agent, go-between, broker, middleman; medium (occultism) العصر الوسيط (‘aṣr) the Middle Ages
وسيطة wasīṭa pl. وسائط wasā’iṭ  means, medium │ والنقل المواصالت وسائط w. al- muwāṣalāt wa-n-naql means of communication and transportation
وسطى f. awāsīṭ , اواسط pl. ausaṭ  اوسط central; middle, wusaṭ وسط pl. wusṭā في اواسط ھذا │ finger middle the الوسطى
week; this of middle the in (usbū‘) األسبوع the of middle the aš-šahr a. اواسط الشھر اوروبا Africa; Central اواسط افريقية month; الشرق Europe; Central (urubbā)) الوسطى الطبقات East; Middle the (šarq) األوسط القرون classes; middle the (ṭabaqāt) الوسطى نتيجة Ages; Middle the )العصور( الوسطى average result, mean وسطى
توسط tawassuṭ mediation, intervention; situation or position in the middle, intermediateness, intermediacy; mediocrity
واسطة wāsiṭa pl. وسائط mediator, mediatress, intermediary; mediacy, agency, instrumentality, agent, device, means, medium; expedient │ بواسطة by means of, through, by, per; on the part of, by; بالوساطة indirectly, mediately; بھذه الواسطة by this means or device, by that; ذلك بوساطة by means of that, by that; واسطة االتصال w. al-ittiṣāl link
متوسط mutawassiṭ middle, medium; medial, median, intermediate; centrally located, central; mediating, intermediary; mediator, go between; mean, average │ الحال متوسط those of average means; متوسط الحجم m. al-ḥajm middle-sized, of medium size; العمر متوسط m. al-‘umr middle-aged; القامة متوسط of medium height, middle- sized; النوع متوسط m. an-nau‘ middling, of medium quality; المتوسط األبيض البحر (baḥr, abyaḍ) the Mediterranean; متوسطة موجات (maujāt) medium waves (radio); متوسط الھجوم center forward (soccer)
وسع wasu‘a يوسع yausu‘u (وساعة wasā‘a) to be wide, roomy, spacious, vast, extensive; -- wasi‘a يسع yasa‘u (سعة sa‘a) to be wide, roomy, spacious; to be well-to-do, be well off; to hold, accommodate, house, seat, etc. (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), have room, have capacity (ه ھ، for); to contain, comprise, comprehend, encompass, include (ھ s.th.); to be large enough, suffice, be sufficient, adequate, enough (ه ھ، for); wasi‘a yasa‘u (وسع wus‘, سعة sa‘a) esp. with negation: to be possible (ه for s.o.), be permitted, be allowed (ه to s.o.), be in s.o.’s (ه) power, be up to s.o. (ه); to be able (ھ to do s.th.), be capable (ھ of); to be allowed (ھ to do s.th.) │ اقول ان يسعني ال I cannot say; اسع ما ذلك I can’t do that II to make wider, roomier, more spacious (ھ s.th.); to
 extend expand (ھ s.th.); to widen, enlarge (ھ or من s.th.); to broaden (ھ s.th.); to be generous, liberal, openhanded (على toward s.o., ه ھ toward s.o. with s.th.); to make rich. enrich (على s.o.) │ خطاه وسع (kuṭāhu) to take longer strides, stride out, quicken one’s pace; ل المكان وسع (makāna) to make room for IV = II; to be or become rich │ برا اوسعه (birran) to 1067 treat s.o. with the greatest reverence, bestow ample favors upon s.o.: شتما اوسعه (šatman) to heap abuse on s.o.; ضربا اوسعه (ḍarban) to give
s.o. a sound beating, wall s.o.; النفقة اوسع (nafaqata) to incur great expenses V to be extended, be expanded, be widened; to spread (out), expand, widen, expand; to have enough room, sit comfortably; to make o.s. comfortable, make o.s. at home (في in); to enlarge, expatiate (في on), talk or write at great length (في about); to proceed (في in); to continue (في s.th., in s.th.) │ النفقة في توسع (nafaqa) to incur great expenses VIII اتسع ittasa‘a to be extended, be expanded, be widened, be enlarged; to expand, widen, grow, increase; to stretch far and wide, be vast; to extend, range; to become rich; to be large or wide enough, suffice, be sufficient, adequate, enough (ل for); to hold, accommodate, house, seat, etc. (ل s.o., s.th.), have room (ل for); to be at s.o.’s (ل) disposal; to be susceptible (ل of); to be able (~ to do s.th.). be capable ( ھ of) │ معنى من الكلمة له تتسع ما بكل  (kalimatu, ma‘nan) in the widest sense of the word X to widen, expand, become wider; to become larger, increase in size; to find wide or large (ھ s.th.)
سعة sa‘a wideness, roominess, spaciousness; extent, range, compass; volume, holding capacity, capacity; capability, faculty, power, ability; comfortableness, comfort; plenty, abundance, profusion; luxury, affluence, wealth │ سعة ذو well-to-do, wealthy; بسعة or سعة عن amply, abundantly; الرحب على والسعة (ruḥb) welcome! سعتي قدر على (qadri sa‘atī) to the best of my abilities; في كان رزقه من سعة (rizqihī) to be wealthy, live in luxury; الصدر سعة s. ṣadr patience, long- suffering; كھربائية سعة (kahrabā’īya) electric capacity; O الموجة سعة s. al-mauja amplitude (el.)
وسع wus‘ ability, capability, faculty; capacity; power, strength; holding capacity │ وسعه wus‘uhū what he can do. what is in his power; ان وسعه في it is in his power to ..., he can …; اقول ان وسعي في I can, or I may, say; اال وسعه في ليس (illā) ha has no other possibility but ..., he cannot but ...; وسعه بذل to go to great pains, do one’s best or utmost
وسع wasa‘ vastness, vast space
وسعة wus‘a wideness, roominess, spaciousness; extent, range, compass; plenty, abundance, profusion (من of)
وسيع wasī‘ pl. وساع wisā‘ wide, vast; roomy, spacious, large; capacious
اوسع ausa‘  wider, larger, roomier, more spacious │ صدرا اوسع (ṣadran) more patient; مدى اوسع (madan) broader, wider
توسيع tausī‘ widening, expansion; broadening, extension; enlargement, increase
at-t. ajal اجل التوسع tausi‘a: توسعة
reprieve, reprieve (jur.)
توسع tawassu‘ extending, extension, widening, increase, enlargement; expansion │ التوسع مع in a wider sense, by extension; استعماري توسع (isti‘mārī) imperialistic expansion; O الحرب توسع t. al- ḥarb extension of the (theater of) war; التوسع سياسة siyāsat at-t. policy of expansion
توسعي tawassu‘ī expansionist (adj.) │ توسعية سياسة (siyāsa) policy of expansion, expansionist policy
اتساع ittisā‘ extending, extension, extensiveness, wideness, spaciousness, vastness, expanse, range, scope, compass, extent; O amplitude (el.); O gauge (of railroad tracks); sufficiency, adequacy │ الكالم في اتساع (kalām) vagueness of expression; ل االتساع عدم ‘adam al-itt, insufficiency, inadequacy for 1068
واسع wāsi‘ wide; broad; large, roomy, spacious, vast, sweeping, extensive; far- reaching │ االنتشار واسع widespread; واسع العدل) الرحمة) (al-‘adl) abounding in mercy (in justice); الصدر واسع w. aṣ-ṣadr patient; forbearing, indulgent, generous, magnanimous; النطاق واسع far-reaching,
 extensive; comprehensive; large-scale; الحيلة واسع رجل (rajul, ḥila) a resourceful, ingenious man; واسع ثوب (taub) wide or loose garment; واسع سھل (sahl) vast (sweeping) plain; واسع شارع broad street
موسوعة mausū‘a pl. -āt comprehensive work; encyclopedia; thesaurus
موسوعي mausū‘ī encyclopedic
موسع mūsī‘ rich, wealthy
متسع mutasi‘ wide, extensive, vast, spacious, roomy, large; ample, abundant, sufficient
لم يجد متسعا │ room space; muttasa‘ متسع لم يكن في الوقت or waqt) (yajid, من الوقت ل
ل متسع (yakun) not to have enough time for; O حيوي متسع (ḥayawī) lebensraum
وسق wasaqa يسق yasiqu (wasq) to load, freight (ھ ھ a ship with) IV do. VIII اتسق ittasaqa to be in good order, be well- ordered; to harmonize, be in keeping (مع with) X to be or become possible (ل for s.o.)
ausāq اوساق wusūq, وسق pl. wasq وسق
load, freight, cargo
اتساق ittisāq harmony
متسق muttasiq in good order, well- ordered; balanced, harmonious
وسكي wiskī whiskey
وسل V to ingratiate o.s. curry favor (الى with), seek to gain access (الى to), seek or solicit s.o.’s (الى) favor; to implore, beseech, entreat (الى s.o.), plead (الى with s.o.); to ask s.o.’s (ب) help, turn with a request (ب to s.o.); to use as a means (ب s.th.), make use (ب of a means)
وسيلة wasīla pl. وسائل wasā’il  means, medium; device, expedient, instrument, tool, agent; measure, step │ االحتياط وسائل precautionary measures, precautions; وسائل التعليم educational aids, training aids, material of instruction; التكييف وسائل air- conditioning installation; المواصالت وسائل
w. al-muwāṣalāt means of communication; النقل وسائل w. an-naql means of transportation; الوسيلة ابتغى to try to ingratiate o.s. (الى ب with s.o. by s.th.); وسيلة منه اتخذ (ittakada) to regard s.th. as an expedient for ...
توسل tawassul request, entreaty, fervent plea; petition, application │ الى توسال tawassulan ilā so as to succeed by this means in ..., in order to get to the point where ...
النقل وسائل w. an-naql means of transportation; الوسيلة ابتغى to try to ingratiate s.o. (الى ب with s.o. by s.th); اتخذ ل الوسيلة منه (ittakada) to regard s.th. as an expedient for ...
توسل tawassul request, entreaty, fervent plea; petition, application │ الى توسال tawassulan ilā so as to succeed by this means in ..., in order to get to the point where ...
وسم wasama يسم yasimu (wasm, سمة sima) to brand (ھ cattle); to stamp, mark, brand (ه ھ، ب s.o., s.th. as) │ بالعار وسمه to brand as infamous, stigmatize s.o. جبينه وسم ب (wusima jabīnuhū) to be written in s.o.’s face II to distinguish (ه s.o.) confer distinction (ه upon s.o.), award a decoration or order (ه to) V to scrutinize, regard attentively, watch closely (ھ s.th.); to examine carefully (ھ s.th.); to regard (ه s.o.) look at (ه); to be marked, characterized (ب by) │ خيرا فيه توسم (kairan) to see promising signs in s.o., expect a lot of good of s o., set great hopes on s.o. VIII اتسم ittasama to be branded; to be marked, characterized (ب by), to bear the stamp of (ب)
سمة sima pl. –āt, sign, mark, characteristic; outward characteristic, feature, trait; stamp, impress, character (of s.th.); visa (Saudi Ar.); pl. -āt also: features, facial expression, mien, bearing 1069
وسم wasm pl. وسوم wusūm brand; tribal mark, tribal brand, characteristic, mark; coat or arms
وسام wisām pl. اوسمة ausima badge; decoration, medal; order; badge or honor
وسام ربطة merit; or order وسام االستحقاق │ Garter; the or Order as-sāq rabṭat w. الساق (jauqat aš-šaraf w. )وسام الشرف )جوقة الشرف الوسام العلوي Honor; of Legion aš-š.) alaouite” “ouissam Moroccan the (‘alawī)
وسامة wasāma grace, gracefulness, charm, beauty
 وسيم wasīm pl. وسماء wusamā’ , وسام wisām graceful, comely, pretty, good- looking; beautiful (face)
موسم mawāsim pl. مواسم mawāsim  time or the year, season; festive season; specif., the Muslim hadj festival); festival, feast day, holiday; fair; bed date, deadline; harvest │ واألعياد المواسم the feasts and holidays; االصطياف موسم summer season (of a health resort); تمثيلي موسم (tamtīlī) or موسم مسرحي (masraḥī) theater season; الحج موسم
m. al-ḥajj season or the Pilgrimage; موسم القطن m. al-quṭn cotton harvest, cotton season
the (rīḥ) الريح الموسمية mausimī: موسمي monsoon
مياسم mawāsim , مواسم pl. mīsam ميسم
mayāsim  branding iron; brand; stigma
موسوم mausūm branded; stigmatized; marked, characterized (ب with)
وسن wasina يوسن yausanu (wasan, سنة sina) to sleep, slumber
وسن wasan slumber, doze
سنة من النوم │ doze slumber, sina سنة
(naum) a short nap
وسن wasin sleepy, drowsy, somnolent
وسنان wasnān , f. وسنى wasnā sleepy, drowsy, somnolent
وسوس waswasa to speak under one’s breath, whisper (ل or الى to s.o.); to inatill evil
(ل or الى in s.o.; passion, devil), prompt or tempt s.o. (ل or الى) with wicked suggestion; to awaken doubts, arouse scruples (ل or الى in s.o.’s mind; conscience) II tawaswasa to reel uneasy, have scruples, be anxious, worried, full of apprehensions; to be in doubt, have misgivings, be suspicious
وسواس waswās pl. وساوس wasāwis  devilish insinuation, temptation; disturbance; scruple; misgiving, suspicion; rustling, rustle, whisper (or leaves, and the like)
وسواس waswās pl. وساوس wasāwis  devilish insinuation, temptation; wicked thoughts; doubt, misgiving, suspicion; delusion, fixed idea; uneasiness, anxiety,
concern; melancholy; الوسواس the Tempter,
Satan │ القطن وسواس w. al-quṭn cotton buds
موسوس muwaswas obsessed with delusions
 وسى IV to shave (ھ the head)
موسى mūsā f., pl. مواس mawāsin, امواس amwās straight razor; see also alphabetically
اسى see مواساة and III) اسى or (variant III وسى  crowd mob, horde, awšāb اوشاب pl. wišb وشب closely al-ittiṣāl w. وشيج االتصال wašīj: وشيج
connected
وشيجة wašīja pl. وشائج wašā’ij close tie
متواشج mutwāsij connected, interrelated
وشح III to adorn or dress (ه s.o., with the wišāḥ, q.v.) V and VIII اتشاح ittašḥa to put on, don (ب a belt, sash, and the like),; to throw on loosely (ب a cloak or 1070 similar garment); to garb o.s. (ب with); to assume (ب a name), go by a name (ب)
وشاح wišāḥ, wušāḥ pl. وشح wušuḥ, اوشحة aušiḥa, وشائح wašā’iḥ  ornamented belt worn by women (in older times, a double band worn sashlike over the shoulder); sash, scarf, cummerbund; band (esp., of an order); tie, bond (fig.); swordbelt; military sash
وشاحة wišāḥa sword
توشيح taušīḥ pl. تواشيح tawāšīḥ composition (mus.); postclassical form of Arab poetry, arranged in stanzas
موشح muwaššah, موشحة muwaššaḥa pl.
-āt postclassical form of Arab poetry, arranged in stanzas
متشح muttašiḥ clad, garbed, attired (ب
in)
وشر wašara يشر yaširu (wašr) to saw, saw apart (ھ s.th.)
prism mawāšīr  مواشير pl. maušūr موشور
موشوري maušūrī prismatic(al)
وشع II to reel, spool (ھ cotton)
وشيع wašī‘ hedge
وشيعة wašī‘a pl. وشائع wašā’i‘  reel, spool, bobbin │ التحريض وشيعة induction coil (el.)
 وشق wašaq lynx (zool.)
وشك wašuka يوشك yaušuku (wašk, وشاكة wašāka) and II to be quick, hurry IV to be on the point or verge (ان of doing s.th.), be about to do s.th. (على or أن), be close (على to) │ أن يوشك he almost ..., he all but ...
وشك wašak, wušk speed, swiftness, hurry │ أن وشك على on the point or verge of (doing s.th.), about to (do s.th.), على الخروج وشك about to go out, just going out
وشكان waškān, wuškān speed, swiftness
وشيك wašīk imminent, impending, near, forthcoming │ الزوال وشيك w. az-zawāl doomed to early ruin; الحل وشيك w. al-ḥall close to a solution, almost solved (problem)
وشل wašal pl. اوشال aušāl dripping water, tears
وشم wašama يشم yašinu (wašm) and II to tattoo (ھ s.th.)
wušūm وشوم wišām, وشام pl. wašm وشم
tattoo, tattoo mark
وشيمة wašīma enmity, hostility, malice
وشنة wašna, wišna (eg.) morello, mahaleb cherry
وشوش wašwaša to whisper in s.o.’s (ه) ear II
tawašwaša to whisper
وشوشة wašwaša whispering, whisper
وشى wašā يشي yašī (wašy) to embellish, ornament with many colors, embroider (ھ a fabric); -- (wašy, وشاية wišāya) to slander, defame (ب الى s.o. with); to inform (ب against), denounce, betray (ب s.o.) II to embellish, ornament with many colors, embroider (ھ a fabric)
شية šiya pl. -āt blotch, spot; blemish, flaw, fault, defect; mark, sign
وشي wašy pl. وشاء wišā’ many-colored ornamentation, embroidery;
embroidered or painted fabrics
وشاء waššā’ vendor of embroidered or painted fabrics
وشاية wišāya defamation, slander
توشية taušiya embellishment, ornamentation; embroidery
واش wāšin pl. واشون wāšūn, وشاة wušāh traitor; slanderer, calumniator; informer, denunciator 1071
وضب waṣaba يصب yaṣibu (وصوب wuṣub) to last; -- waṣiba يوصب yauṣabu (waṣab) and V to be (chronically) ill
وصب waṣab pl. اوصاب	auṣāb illness; discomfort, hardship, suffering
واصب wāṣib lasting, permanent
وصد waṣada يصد yaṣidu (waṣad) to be firm, stand firmly IV to close, shut (ھ a door) │ وجھه في الباب اوصد (wajhihī) to block s.o.’s way, deny s.o. access
وصيد waṣīd pl. وصد wuṣud threshold, doorstep
وصف waṣafa يصف yaṣfu (waṣf) to describe, depict, portray, picture (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to characterize (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to praise, laud, extol (ه s.o.); to attribute, ascribe (ه ب to s.o., quality), credit (ه ب s.o. with), praise (ه ب s.o. for), say s.th. (ب) to s.o.’s ( ه) credit; to prescribe (ھ ل a medicine to s.o.) │ يوصف ال (yūṣafu) indescribable; nondescript VI to describe to one another, tell one another (ھ s.th.) VIII اتصف ittaṣafa to be described; to possess as a characteristic (ب a quality or peculiarity); to be distinguished, known, characterized, marked (ب by a quality, property, peculiarity) X to consult (ه a doctor)
صفة ṣifa pl. -āt quality, property; attribute; characteristic, distinguishing mark, peculiarity; adjective (gram.); asyndetio relative clause (without relative pronoun; gram.); way, manner │ بصفة as, in the capacity of; وزيرا بصفته in his capacity of minister, as a minister; بصفة خاصة (kāṣṣa) in particular, especially, specifically; رسمية غير بصفة (gair rasmīyatin) unofficially
وصف waṣf description, depiction, portrayal, characterization; -- (pl. اوصاف auṣāf) quality, property; characteristic, distinguishing mark, peculiarity; adjective (gram.); pl. اوصاف description of a person
│ الوصف يفوق شيء (yafūqu l-waṣfa) a thing beyond description, an indescribable thing; اوصافه اخذ to take down s.o.’s personal description
 وصفة waṣfa description, depiction, portrayal; medical prescription
وصفي waṣfī descriptive, depictive
وصاف waṣṣāf describer, depicter
وصيف waṣīf pl. وصفاء wuṣafā’  servant; page
وصيفة waṣīfa pl. وصائف waṣā’if  maid, servant girl; maid of honor, lady in waiting
مواصفة muwāṣafa detailed description; explanation, interpretation; specification; pl. -āt specifications │ العالج مواصفة directions for treatment
موصوف mauṣūf described, depicted, portrayed, pictured; characterized (ب by), having II attribute (ب s.th.); noun followed by attribute or asyndetic relative clause (gram.); prescribed
متصف muttaṣif characterized (ب by), possessing II a property or an attribute (ب s.th.)
مستوصف mustauṣaf pl. -āt clinic
وصل waṣala يصل yaṣilu (waṣl, صلة ṣila) to connect, join, unite, combine, link, interlock (ھ ب s.th. with), attach (ھ ب s.th. to); to establish (صلة ṣilatan a contact, a connection; a relation و – بين between -- and); to bring into relation (و – بين s.th. with s.th. else); to give (ب s.o. s.th.), bestow, confer (ه ب upon s.o. s.th.), award (ه ب to s.o. s.th.); -- (وصول wuṣūl) to arrive (الى or ھ at a place); to come to s.o.’s (الى or ه) hands; to reach (الى or ه ,ھ s.o., s.th.); to come, get (الى or ه ,ھ to); to reach (الى or ھ an amount), amount to (الى or ھ); to enter (الى a phase); to get (ب الى s.o. to or to the point where) │ خطاب وصلني I have received a letter; 1072 الخبر وصله (kabar)he received the news; حد الى ھذا يصل كذا (ḥaddi k.) this gets to the point
where ...; الحاصمة الصفحة الى وصل (ṣafḥa) to enter the decisive phase II to connect, join, unite, combine (ھ ب s.th. with); to make (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.) get (الى to), see that
s.o. or s.th. (ه ھ،) gets to (ھ); to get, take, bring, move, lead, show, conduct, convey, channel (ه ھ، الى s.o., s.th. to); to give (ه s.o.) a ride, a lift; to carry, transport, transfer, convey (ھ الى، s.th. to); to deliver,
transmit, communicate (ھ الى s.th. to); to conduct, act as a conductor (el.); to accompany, escort (ه الى s.o. to); to connect (ھ الى s.th. to an electric circuit, ب ھ one apparatus with another, an electric device with the main line), plug in (ھ s.th.); to turn on, switch on (ھ s.th.; el.) III to continue (في or ھ s.th.), proceed (في or ھ in or with); to persist, persevere (في or ھ in); to be connected (ھ with), bear (ھ on), belong, pertain (ھ to); to be close friends, maintain close relations (ه with s.o.); to have sexual intercourse (ھا with a woman)
│ بالنھار الليل واصل (laila, nahāri) to work day and night; في (سعيه) جھده واصل (jahdahū, sa‘yahū) to make untiring efforts for IV = II; O to put through (a long-distance call) │ بحقه حق ذي كل اوصل (kulla dī ḥaqqin bi-ḥaqqihī) to give everyone his due V to obtain access (الى to); to gain access by certain means (الى to), get (الى into) in come way or other; to attain (الى to), arrive (الى at), reach (الى s.th.), come by s.th. (الى) VI to be interconnected; to form an uninterrupted sequence VIII اتصل ittaṣala to be joined ( ب to), be connected (ب with); to combine, unite (ب with); to get in touch (ب with s.o., also, e.g., by telephone); to contact ( ب s.o.); to have relation (ب to), bear (ب on), be connected, have to do (ب with); to join (ب s.o. or s.th.); to be attached (ب to); to be near s.o. or a place (ب), be adjacent, continuous (ب to), adjoin (ب s.th.), border, abut (ب on), belong (ب to); to come to s.o.’s (ب) knowledge; to be continued, continue, go on; to be continuous, form a continuous chain; to be related (الى to); to trace one’s descent (الى to); to come, get ( الى to), arrive (الى at), reach (الى s.th.) │ قد ان بنا اتصل it has come to our knowledge that ...; تلفونيا به اتصل to get in touch with
s.o. by telephone, have o.s. connected with; النار به اتصلت to catch fire
صلة ṣila pl. -āt junction, juncture; relation; connection; link, tie, bond; relationship, kinship; present, gift, grant; syndetic relative clause (gram.); O leadin, lead-in wire (radio) │ الوصل صلة ṣ. al-waṣl connecting link
وصل waṣl junction, juncture, connection; union, combination; linkage,
 nexus; synopsis, summary; reunion of lovers; (pl. اوصال auṣāl) relation, link, tie, connection; contact (el.); (pl. وصوالت wuṣūlāt) voucher, receipt │ الفائت وصل synopsis of the previous chapters of a newspaper serial; الوصل ليلة lailat al-w. last night of a lunar month
وصل wuṣl, wiṣl pl. اوصال auṣāl limb, member (of the body); pl. articulations, joints │ اوصاله حل (ḥalla) or اوصاله قطع to dismember, dissect s.th.
وصلة waṣla a character (ٓ ) over silent alif (gram.)
وصلة wuṣla pl. -āt, وصل wuṣal junction, juncture; connection; contact (el.); attachment, fastening, fixture; tie, link; joint (also arch.); hinge; connecting piece, coupling; inset, insertion; overlap (arch.); line of communication; hyphen │ وصلة التمدد w. at-tamaddud expansion joint (arch.)
وصلية waṣlīya connecting road, side road; feeder road 1073
وصول wuṣūl arrival; attainment, obtainment, achievement; receipt; (pl. -āt) receipt, voucher
وصولي wuṣūlī upstart, parvenu
وصيل waṣīl inseparable friend, intimate, chum
الموصل al-mauṣil Mosul (city in N Iraq)
توصيل tauṣīl uniting, joining, connecting; supply, feed; connection, junction; electric contact, feed wire, feeder; electric circuit, connection layout, connection; conductivity (el.); communication, transmission, transfer, conveyance;
delivery; execution, dispatch, discharge; (pl. تواصيل tawāṣīl) receipt, voucher │ O األرض الى توصيل (arḍ) ground connection, ground (radio); O على توصيل التضاعف (taḍā‘uf) multiple connection, series parallel (el.); O التوازي على توصيل (tawāzī) parallel connection (el.); O توصيل التوالي على series connection (el.); جيد التوصيل jayyid at-t. or good conductivity, good conductor (el.); O التوصيل سداد saddād at-t. (male) plug (el.)
توصيلة tausīla connection, contact (el.)
│ األرض توصيلة t. al-arḍ ground connection (radio)
وصال wiṣāl reunion, being together (of lovers); communion (in love)
مواصلة muwāṣala connection; continuation, continuance; continuity; pl.
-āt lines of communication, communications │ حديدية مواصلة (ḥadīdīya) rail communication; سلكية مواصلة (silkīya) wire communication; المواصلة اسباب means of communication, communications; طرق المواصالت ṭuruq al-m. traffic routes; وزارة المواصالت ministry of communications
ايصال īṣāl pl. -āt joining, connecting, junction; uniting, union; connection; communication; conveyance; transport, transportation; passage; transmission; putting through (of a long-distance call); receipt, voucher
توصل tawaṣṣul attainment (الى of an objective), achievement (الى of a purpose); arrival; reunion
تواصل tawāṣul continuance; continuity
│ بتواصل continually, persistently
اتصال ittiṣāl connectedness, unitedness, union; juncture, conjunction, link; connection; contact; liaison; establishment of contacts; tuning in (of a radio); contacting (ب of), getting in touch (ب with); junction, intersection (of two roads); continuance, continuation; continuity │ ب اتصال على in touch with;
ب اتصاله في استمر (istamarra) to keep in touch with s.o.; االتصال نقطة nuqṭat al-itt. points of contact; تلفوني اتصال telephone connection
موصول mauṣūl bound, tied; glued, riveted (ب to), fixed (ب on; of the eyes); relative pronoun (gram.) │ موصولة اياما (ayyāman) for several (or many) consecutive days, for some time
موصل muwaṣṣil pl. -āt conductor (el.) │ O ارضي موصل (arḍī) ground wire (radio); O سلكي موصل (silkī) wire, wiring (el.)
متواصل mutawāṣil persistent, continued, continuous, continual, unceasing, incessant, uninterrupted
 متصل muttaṣil persistent, continued, continuous, continual, unceasing, incessant, uninterrupted; adjoining, adjacent, contiguous │ متصل ضمير pronominal suffix (gram.); الحلقات متصل m. al-ḥalaqāt closely interlinked, closely connected
وصم waṣama to disgrace, tarnish, blemish (ھ name, honor); to afflict with the blemish ( ب of s.th.; ه s.o.), put the blame for s.th. ( ب) on s.o. (ه) V to be tarnished, sullied (honor)
وصم waṣm disgrace 1074
وصمة waṣma disgrace; mark of disgrace, stain, blot, blemish; fault, flaw, shortcoming, defeat; ailing condition, malaise
توصيم tauṣīm sailing condition, malaise
وصوص waṣwaṣa to peep through a hole or crack; (also = وسوس) to whisper
وصوص waṣwaṣ and وصواص waṣwāṣ pl.
وصاوص waṣāwiṣ peephole
وصوصة waṣwaṣa furtive glance, peep, peek
وصو II and IV to entrust, commend, commit ( ه ب to s.o.’s charge or care s.o.); to direct, bid, advice, counsel (ه ب s.o. to do s.th.), recommend (ه ب to s.o. s.th.), impress (ه ب on s.o. s.th.); to order (ه s.o., ب to do s.th.), charge, commission (ه ب s.o. with), enjoin (ه ب on s.o. s.th.), make s.th. (ب) incumbent (ه on s.o.); to order (ه ب from
s.o. s.th.), give s.o. (ه) an order for (ب), place an order (ه ب with s.o. for); to decree (ب s.th.); to make one’s will; to will, determine or decree by will (ان that); to bequeath, make over, transfer by will (ل ب to s.o. s.th.); to appoint as executor (الى s.o.) │ ب خيرا اوصاه (kairan) he urged him to take care of X خيرا به استوصى (kairan) to make s.th. one’s concern (or one’s business), make a point of s.th. (in deference to another’s recommendation); to mean well, have the best intentions with; خيرا باألجر استوصى (bi-l-ajri kairan)  to fix a moderate or low price
وصي wasīy pl. اوصياء auṣiyā’ plenipotentiary, mandatory, authorized agent, commissioner; executor; legal
guardian, curator, tutor; administrator, caretaker, trustee; regent; testator; client, principal, mandator │ العرش على وصى (‘arš) regent, prince regent
وصية waṣīya pl. وصايا waṣāyā direction, directive, instruction, injunction, order, command, commandment; recommendation advice, counsel, admonition, exhortation; will, testament, testamentary disposition; bequest, legacy
│ العشر الوصايا (‘ašr) the Ten Commandments
وصاة waṣāh and وصاية prescription; order, ordinance, regulation, decree; instruction, direction, advice, counsel
وصاية wiṣāya guardianship, curatorship, tutorship; executorships; tutelage; mandate (pol.); trusteeship │ الوصاية مجلس majlis al-w. regency council
توصية tauṣiya pl. -āt, تواص tawāṣin recommendation; admonition, exhortation, advice, counsel; proposal, suggestion; order, instruction, direction, commission, mandate; (commercial) order, commission
│ بالتوصية to order, on commission; خطاب توصية letter of recommendation; شركة توصية širkat t. limited partnership
ايصاء īṣā’ = توصية; appointment of an executor (Isl. Law)
موص muwaṣṣin and mūṣin client, principal; mandator, testator │ موص شريك silent partner
به موصى mūṣan bihī that which has been disposed of; bequeathed, willed; bequest, legacy; decreed, ordered; recommended; عليه موصى registered (letter); له الموصى legatee; heir; اليه الموصى executor
وضؤ waḍu’a يوضؤ yauḍu’u (وضوء wuḍū’, وضاءة waḍā’a) to be pure, clean V to perform the ritual ablution before prayer
وضاء brilliant, radiant, bright
وضاءة wuḍā’a purity, cleanness, cleanliness
وضوء wuḍū’ purity, cleanness, cleanliness; ritual ablution before prayer
وضوء waḍū’ water for the ritual ablution
 وضيء waḍī’ pl. وضاء wiḍā’ pure, clean 1075
توضؤ tawaḍḍu’ ritual ablution
mīḍā’a ميضاءة and mīḍa’a ميضأة
fountain or basin for the ritual ablution
توضيب taḍīb arrangement; preparation; dressing, processing (mining industry)
وضح waḍaḥa يضح yaḍiḥu (وضوح wuḍūḥ) to be or become clear, plain, patent, manifest, evident; to appear, show, come out, come to light, become visible II and IV to make clear, make plain (ھ s.th.); to explain, explicate, clear up, clarify, expound, elucidate, illustrate (ھ s.th.); to set forth, propound (ھ s.th.); to make visible, make manifest, show (ھ s.th.); to indicate, designate, denote, express (ھ s.th.) V = I; to be made clear, be clarified, be cleared up; to be shown, be indicated; to be obvious VIII اتضح ittaḍaḥa = I and V; to follow clearly (من from), be explained (من by) X to ask (ه s.o.) for an explanation, for clarification (ھ of s.th.); to examine, investigate, explore
(ھ or عن s.th.), inquire, search (ھ or عن into); to try to see clear (ھ in), seek to understand clearly (ھ s.th.)
وضح waḍaḥ pl. اوضاح auḍāḥ light, brilliance, luminosity, brightness │ في النھار وضح (w. in-nahār) in broad daylight
وضاح waḍḍāḥ) bright, clear, brilliant, shining, luminous
وضوح wuḍūḥ clarity, clearness, plainness, distinctness; visibleness; obviousness; appearance │ بوضوح clearly, plainly, distinctly
اوضح auḍaḥ  clearer
توضيح tauḍīḥ elucidation; showing, visualization; explanation; clarification; explication, illustration
ايضاح īḍāḥ pl. -āt elucidation; showing, visualization; explanation; clarification; explication, illustration
ايضاحي īḍāḥī clarifying, explanatory, explicatory, illustrative, elucidative
اتضاح ittiḍāḥ clarity, clearness; plainness, distinctness; visibleness, manifestness
استيضاح istīḍāḥ pl. -āt request for clarification, inquiry, formal question, interpellation
واضح wāḍiḥ clear, lucid; plain, distinct; obvious, patent, manifest; visible, conspicuous; evident, apparent, ostensible
│ بذاته وضح (bi-dātihī) self-evident; self- explanatory; ان الواضح من it is obvious that ...; رابعه في الشمس وضوح واضح األمر (wuḍūḥa š-šamsi fī rābi‘ati n-nahār) the matter is clear as daylight
متضح muttaḍiḥ plain, distinct; clear; obvious, patent, manifest
وضر waḍar pl. اوضار auḍār dirt, filth
وضع waḍa‘a يضع yaḍa‘u (waḍ‘) to lay, lay off, lay on, lay down, put down (ھ s.th.); to set down (ھ s.th.); to place (ھ s.th.); to set up, erect (ھ s.th.); to fix, attach, affix (ھ في s.th. to. on, in); to lay, put (ھ في s.th. into); to impose (ھ على s.th. on s.o.); to take (عن ھ s.th. from s.o.), rid of a burden, unburden (عن s.o.), unsaddle (عن a horse); to bear (ه a child), give birth to (ه); to invent, contrive, devise, originate, produce (ھ s.th.); to found, establish, set up, start ( ھ s.th.); to write down, put down in writing, set down, lay down (ھ s.th.); to write, compile, compose (ھ a book or similar work of the mind), create (ھ s.th.); to coin (ھ a new word, a new term, or the like); to humble, humiliate, disparage (من or ه s.o.), derogate, detract (من or ه from);
-- (waḍ‘, وضوع wuḍū‘, ضعة ḍa‘a, di‘a) with نفسه nafsahu: to abase o.s. humble o.s.; -- waḍu‘a يوضع yauḍu‘u (وضاعة waḍā‘a) to be low, lowly, humble │ وضع اساسا (asāsan) to lay a foundation, lay a cornerstone; 1076 في ثقته وضع (tiqatahu) to place one’s confidence in; على) جانبا وضع جانب) (jāniban) to lay, or put, s.th. aside; جيبه في وضعه (jaibihī) to put s.th. in one’s pocket; ل حدا وضع (ḥaddan) to put an end to s.th.; على ختما وضع (katman) to please a seal on; السالح وضع to lay down arms; وضع عنقه في السلسلة wuḍi‘at is-silsilatu fī ‘unuqihī approx.: to have a millstone about one’s neck, he seriously handicapped; مشروعا وضع to make or form a plan; قدره من وضع (qadrihī) to depreciate s.th., lower the value of s.th.; تقريرا وضع to write or make a report; اقتراحات وضع to draw up proposals, make suggestions;
 اھتمامه مقدمة في وضع (muqaddamati htimāmihī) to devote particular attention to s.th., make s.th. one’s foremost concern, give priority to s.th.; ل لفظا وضع (lafẓan) to coin a word for; معنى للفظ وضع به خاصا (li-l-lafẓi ma‘nan kāṣṣan bihī) to give a special meaning to an expression, place a particular construction on an expression; عينيه نصب وضعه (nuṣba ‘ainaihi) to point out, demonstrate s.th. to s.o.; عينيه على نظارته وضع (naẓẓāratahū) to put on one’s glasses; نظما وضع (nuẓuman) to lay down rules, حدة على وضع (ḥidatin) to set s.th. apart, single out s.th.; موضعه وضع (mauḍi‘ahū) to put s.th. in the place of s.th. else; التنفيذ موضع وضعه (mauḍi‘ahū) to put s.th. into force, make s.th. effective or operative; to implement s.th.; موضع وضع الشك (mauḍi‘a š-šakk) to doubt s.th., question s.th.; العمل موضع وضعه (mauḍi‘a
l-‘amal) to put s.th. into action, translate s.th. into deeds; الفعل موضع الفكرة وضع (fikrata mauḍi‘a l-fi‘l) to translate the idea into action; فالن موضع نفسه وضع to put o.s. in s.o.’s position; موضعه غير في وضع to mislay, misplace s.th.; على يده وضع (yadahū) to take possession of, lay hold of; اسير الف على يده وضع to take 1,000 prisoners; ضميره على يده وضع to lay one’s hand over one’s heart; يده من وضع (yadihī) to lay s.th. aside, toss s.th. aside; تحت وضعه يده to put s.th. in s.o.’s power IV to hurry; to take an active part, participate actively ( في in); pass. ūḍi‘a to suffer losses (في in) VI to behave humbly and modestly, to abase o.s., humble o.s.; to agree, come to an agreement (على on) VIII اتضع ittaḍa‘a to humble o.s., abase o.s.
ضعة ḍa‘a, ḍi‘a lowness, lowliness, humbleness; scantiness, poorness, inferiority
وضع waḍ‘ pl. اوضاع auḍā‘ laying down; putting down; laying on; fixing, attaching; setting up; placing; writing down, record(ing)j drawing up, execution (of a document, deed, etc.); composition (of a printed work); writing, compilation (of a book); creation; invention; coining (of a word); coinage; conclusion (of a treaty); parturition, delivery, childbirth; regulation, rule; sketch, draft; attitude, bearing, carriage; posture, pose (of the
body, e.g., in dancing, before a camera); position, location; situation; statement (math.); foundation, establishment; -- humiliation; -- pl. اوضاع circumstances, conditions; statutes; rules, principles; manner; mores, practices, usages, customs; conventions, conventional rules
│ وقوال وضعا wad‘an wa-qaulan in words and deeds; الحالي الوضع the present situation; اليد وضع w. al-yad laying on of the hand; occupation, occupancy, seizure; الوضع آالم labor pains
وضعة waḍ‘a, wiḍ‘a situation; position
وضعي waḍ‘ī relating to situation or position, situational, positional; positive; positivistic; positivist (philos.); man- made; based on convention, conventional
القيم (jur.); law positive قانون وضعي │ (math.) decimals (qiyam) الوضعية
وضعية waḍī‘ya situation; positivism (philos.) 1077
وضاعة waḍā‘a lowness, lowliness, humbleness
وضيع waḍī‘ pl. وضعاء wuḍa‘ā’  lowly, humble, base, vulgar, common; plebeian; low; inferior │ الوضعية الطبقة (ṭabaqa) the lowest class; الرفيع الوضيع low and high, the lowly and the great
وضيعة waḍī‘a pl. وضائع waḍā’i‘  s.th. put down, laid down or deposited; s.th. entrusted to s.o.’s custody, trust, charge, deposit; (īsl. Law) resale with a loss; price reduction, rebate
موضع mauḍi‘ pl. مواضع mawāḍi‘  place, spot, site, locality; passage (in a book); object (of s.th.); position, situation, location; rank; occasion │ موضعه في in the right place, at the right time, timely, convenient, opportune; موضعه غير في in the wrong place, out of place; الحال موضع في in the present case; حفاوة موضع كان (mauḍi‘a ḥafāwatin) he was the object of a (festive) reception; االعجاب موضع m. al-i‘jāb object of admiration; الحنان موضع m. al-ḥanān object of sympathy; see also waḍa‘a I;
قدم موضع m. qadamin a foot (of ground)
موضعي mauḍi‘ī local
تواضع tawāḍu‘ humility, modesty; lowness, lowliness, humbleness
 اتضاع ittiḍā‘ humility, modesty; lowness, lowliness, humbleness
واضع wāḍi‘ writer, author; creator; inventor; originator; in childbed; unveiled (woman) │ اليد واضع al-yad occupier, occupant; holder of actual possession, possessor (jur.)
موضوع mauḍū‘ pl. -āt, مواضيع mawāḍī‘  object; theme, subject, topic; question, problem, issue; subject matter, matter; treatise, essay, article, paper; axiom; postulate (math.) │ الموضوعات فھرس fihris al-m. table of contents, index; ادرك الموضوع adraka l-mauḍū‘a he got the point; موضوع ذي غير not topical, not timely
موضوعي mauḍū‘ī objective; concerning the subject matter, the subject itself (not the form)
موضوعية mauḍū‘īya objectivism (philos.)
مواضعات muwāḍa‘āt analogous (word) coinings
متواضع mutawāḍi‘ humble; modest, unpretentious, unassuming, simple; small, little, insignificant
وضم waḍam pl. اوضام auḍām meat counter, meat block, butcher’s block
وطئ waṭI’a يطأ yaṭa’u (وطء waṭ’) to tread underfoot (ھ s.th.), tread, step, walk (ھ on); to set foot (ھ on); to walk (ھ over); to mount (ھ a horse); to trample down, trample underfoot (ھ s.th.); to have sexual intercourse (to with a woman) II to pave, level, make smooth or even (ھ s.th., esp., the way); to make smooth and soft, prepare, fix up, make comfortable (ھ a seat, the bed, or the like, ل for s.o.); to make ready, prepare (ھ s.th.); to reduce, slash (ھ s.th.); to force down, press down (ھ s.th.); to lower (ھ s.th.) │ صوته وطأ (ṣautahū) to lower the voice III to agree, be in agreement (ه على with s.o. on) IV to make (ه s.o.) step or tread (ھ on); to make (ه s.o.) trample down (ھ s.th.) VI to agree, be in agreement, cooperate, work hand in hand, act in concert, play into each other’s hands, act in collusion (على in s.th., in order to carry out s.th.)
وطء waṭ’ and وطاء waṭā’ low ground, depression
وطأة waṭ’a pressure; oppression, coercion, compulsion, force; gravity; violence, vehemence │ الوطأة شديد cruel ( على to), having a deadly effect (على on), of fatal consequences (على for); وطأة اشتدت ٨٧٠١ الشيء (ištaddat) to aggravate, become grave, trying, grueling (distress); المرض وطأة الشتداد li-št. w. il-maraḍ) because of the violence with which the disease struck
وطئ waṭI’ low; flat, level
اوطأ auṭa’  lower
موطأ mauṭa’ and موطئ mauṭi’ pl. مواطئ mawāṭi’  place where the fact is set down, footing, foothold; footprint, footstep, track; footstool │ األقدام موطئ m. al-aqdām a foot (of ground); األقدام مواطئ the ground
توطئة tauṭi’a introduction, initiation; preparation; reduction, lowering │ لتوطئة in preparation of ..., for the purpose of ...; الصوت توطئة t. aṣ-ṣaut lowering of the voice
مواطأة muwāṭa’a agreement; secret understanding, connivance, collusion
تواطؤ tawūṭu’ agreement; secret understanding, connivance, collusion
واطئ wāṭi’ low; muffled, subdued, soft (voice) │ الوطئة األراضي the Netherlands
اواطب auṭāb, اوطاب wiṭāb, وطاب pl. waṭb وطب amply مملوء الوطاب ب │ milkskin awāṭib  empty-handed خالي الوطاب with; provided
وطد waṭada يطد yaṭidu (waṭd) and II to make firm, strong or stable, strengthen, brace, reinforce, cement, consolidate, stabilize (ھ s.th.); to stamp down, ram, tamp (ھ earth, etc.); to pave (ھ ل the way for s.o.), prepare (ھ ل the ground for) │ في ثقته وطد (tiqatahū) to rely firmly on, put one’s faith in; ان العزم وطد (‘azma) to resolve firmly
to ..., come to the firm decision to ...; وطد المحبة عرى (‘urā l-maḥabba) to strengthen the bands of friendship; في اقدامه وطد (aqdāmahū) to gain a footing in
وطيد waṭīd firm; strong; solid, sturdy; unshakable │ ب األمل وطيد (w. al-amal) having strong hopes of, confident of
 اوطاد auṭād mountains
ميطدة mīṭada rammer, tamper
توطيد tauṭīd strengthening, bracing, reinforcement, cementation; consolidation, stabilization │ السلم توطيد t. as-silm safeguarding, or maintenance, of peace; الفرنك سعر توطيد t. si‘r al-f. stabilization of the franc
موطد muwaṭṭad firm, strong; solid, sturdy │ األركان موطد firmly established, resting on firm foundations
وطر waṭar pl. اوطار auṭār wish, desire; aim, end, object, purposed
وطيس waṭīs furnace │ الوطيس حمي (ḥamiya) there was fierce fighting; الوطيس حامي fierce, grim, bitter (fighting)
وطش waṭaša يطش yaṭišu (waṭš) to strike, hit, slap (ه s.o.)
وطف waṭifa يوطف yauṭafu (waṭaf) to have bushy eyebrows
اوطف auṭaf , f. وطفاء waṭfā’  bushy- browed; وطفاء rain-heavy and low-hanging (cloud)
وطن waṭana يطن yaṭinu (waṭn) to dwell, live, reside, stay (ب in a place) II to choose for residence (ھ a place), settle down, get settled, take up one’s residence (ھ in a place) │ على نفسه وطن (nafsahū) to get used to, adjust o.s. to, reconcile o.s. to, put up with; to prepare o.s. mentally for; to make up one’s mind to (do s.th.) V to settle down (ھ or ب in a place) │ توطنت  على نفسه (nfsuhū) = على نفسه وطن (see above) X to choose for residence (ھ a place); to settle (ھ a country); to settle down, get settled, take up one’s residence (ھ in); to live permanently (ھ in a place); to take root, become naturalized, acclimated (ھ in)
وطن waṭan pl. اوطان auṭān homeland, home country, fatherland; home │ الوطن القبلي (qiblī) Cape Bon (tun.); القومي الوطن االسرائيلي (qaumī, isrā’īlī) the Jewish 1079 National Home; وطنه اھل ahl w. his countrymen, his compatriots; الوطن حب ḥubb al-w. patriotism; O الوطن شائع cosmopolitan
وطني waṭanī home; native; indigenous, domestic; patriotic; national; nationalistic;
(pl. -ūn) nationalist, patriot │ مصنوعات وطنية domestic products, products of the country
وطنية waṭanīya nationalism; national sentiment, patriotism
موطن mauṭin pl. مواطن mawāṭin  residence, domicile; habitat; native place, home town, home; native country, home country. fatherland; place, locality, area, region, section, district, zone; point, spot; right place; right time │ الضعف موطن m. aḍ-ḍu‘f soft or sore spot; weak spot, weakness; العلة موطن على يده وضع (yadahū,
m. il-‘illa) to lay one’s finger on an open sore, touch a sore spot; الوضيع الموطن the lowest point, the low mark, the bottom
استيطان istīṭān immigration; settling down; settling, settlement, colonization; “istitan”, a special impost in Tunisia
مواطن muwāṭin countryman, compatriot, fellow citizen │ عالمي مواطن (‘ālamī) world citizen
متوطن mutawaṭṭin native, indigenous, domestic; resident; deep-rooted; endemic (med.)
مستوطن mustauṭin native, indigenous, domestic; resident; deep-rooted
وطاويط waṭāwiṭ , وطاوط pl. waṭwāṭ وطواط
waṭāwīṭ  bat (zool.)
II وطأ for II وطى □
واط wāṭin low; soft; see alphabetically
وظب waẓba يظب yaẓibu (وظوب wuẓūb) to do persistently, regularly, keep doing, practice constantly (على or ھ s.th.), continue to do s.th. III do.; to persevere, persist (على in), take pains (على with), devote o.s. assiduously, apply o.s. with perseverance or steadily (على to s.th.)
مواظبة muwāẓaba diligence, assiduity, perseverance, persistence
مواظب muwāẓib diligent, assiduous, persevering, persistent
وظف II to assign (ه على s.th. to s.o.); to impose (ه على s.th., esp. a tax, on s.o.), burden, encumber (ھ على with s.th. s.o.); to assign an office (ه to s.o.), appoint to an office, employ, hire (ه s.o.); to invest (ھ money) V to be appointed to an office, obtain a
 position. get a job; to hold an office, work in a position, have a job │ الحكومة في توظف to work as an official with the government
وظيفة waẓīfa pl. وظائف waẓā’if  daily ration; pay; office, position, post, job; officialship, officialdom; duty, task, assignment; (school) assignment, lesson, homework; employ, service; work; function │ وظيفة ادى (addā) to fill a post, attend to an office, exercise a function; خالية وظائف (kāliya) vacancies; want ads (in a newspaper); الوظائف علم ‘ilm al-w. or علم األعضاء وظائف ‘i. w. al-a‘ḍā’ physiology
وظيفي waẓīfī functional
توظيف tauẓīf employment, appointment (to an office) │ المال توظيف investment
موظف muwaẓẓaf fixed (salary); employed, appointed; -- (pl. -ūn) employee; official, officer, civil servant; functionary │ الحكومة موظف government official; عمومي موظف (‘umūmī) public functionary; الموظفين اكبر senior official
وعب wa‘aba يعب ya‘ibu (wa‘b) to take the whole, all (ھ of s.th.) IV do.; to insert (ھ في s.th. in) X = I; to uproot, root out, extirpate, exterminate (ھ s.th.); to embrace, enclose, encircle (ه s.o., ذراعيه بين with the arms); to contain, hold 1080 (ھ s.th.); to be able to take in (ھ s.th.), nave room (ھ for); to comprehend, understand, grasp, take in (ھ s.th.)
استيعاب istī‘āb capacity; study; full comprehension, grasp
وعث wa‘t, wa‘it difficult, hard, troublesome, tiresome, laborious, arduous
وعثاء wa‘tā’ difficulty, trouble, hardship, inconvenience, discomfort
وعد wa‘ada يعد ya‘idu (wa‘d) to make a promise; to give one’s word; to promise ( ه ب or ه ھ s.o. s.th.); to threaten (ه ب s.o. with) │ بان نفسه وعد to promise o.s. to ..., intend firmly to ...; بشرفه وعد (bi-šarafihī) to pledge o.s. on one’s honor, give one’s word of honor III to make an arrangement; to arrange for a meeting or rendezvous, make an appointment (ه ھ with s.o. for a given time or at a certain place) IV = I; V to threaten; to menace (ه s.o.) VI to make an appointment VIII اتعد
itta‘ada to come to an understanding, agree among each other, make arrangements (ان that)
عدة ‘ida promise
وعد wa‘d pl. وعود wu‘ūd promise
وعيد wa‘īd threats; promises
وعيدي wa‘īdī threatening, menacing, minatory
موعد mau‘id, موعدة mau‘da pl. مواعد mawā‘id  promise; pledge, engagement, commitment; rendezvous, date, appointment; time and place of an appointment; appointed time; time, date, deadline; anniversary │ معه موعد على كان منه)) to have an appointment with s.o.
ميعاد mī‘ād pl. مواعيد mawā‘īd  promise; appointment, date, rendezvous; appointed time; time agreed on, time fixed by appointment; deadline, date (esp. also due date for repaying a debt); consulting hour, office hour(s) (of a doctor, etc.); visiting hours (in museums, etc.); (time of) departure (of trains, buses, etc.) │ الميعاد في or ميعاده في on time, punctually; غير على ميعاد (gairi m.) untimely, unpunctually; من ميعاد غير min gairi m. quite unexpectedly, all of a sudden, suddenly; مع ميعاد على كان to have an appointment with; المواعيد بيان bayān al-m. railroad timetable; األكل ميعاد
m. al-akl mealtime, eating time; التسليم ميعاد date of delivery; المرأة ميعاد m. al-mar'a menses; عرقوبية مواعيد (‘urqūbīya) deceptive promises; الميعاد ارض arḍ al-m. the Land of Promise
مواعدة muwā‘ada arrangement, agreement; appointment, rendezvous, date
ايعاد ī‘ād threat
توعد tawa‘‘ud threat
توعدي tawa‘‘udī threatening, menacing, minatory
موعود mau‘ūd promised; fixed, appointed, stipulated (time); موعود and موعودة mau‘āda pl. مواعيد mawā‘īd  promise
وعر wa‘ara يعر ya‘iru (wa‘r and وعور wu‘ūr) and wa‘ira يوعر yau‘aru (wa‘ar), wa‘ūra yau‘uru (وعارة wa‘āra, وعورة wu‘ūra) to be rough, rugged, difficult (terrain) V = I
 وعر wa‘r rock debris; rugged, roadless terrain
وعر wa‘r pl. وعور wu‘ūr, اوعار au‘ār covered with rock debris; cleft, riven, rugged, wild; rough, uneven; roadless, pathless; hard, difficult
وعير wa‘īr covered with rock debris; cleft, riven, cragged, rugged, wild; rough, uneven; roadless, pathless; hard, difficult
وعورة wu‘ūra unevenness, roughness; difficulty │ األرض وعورة w. al-arḍ difficult terrain
اوعر au‘ar  rougher, more rugged, harder 1081
وعز IV to give to understand, intimate, insinuate (في or ب s.th., الى to s.o.), point out by a sign or motion (في or الى ب to s.o. s.th.); to suggest (في or الى ب to s.o. s.th.); to inspire (في or الى ب s.o. with, s.o. to do s.th.); to advise, counsel, recommend (في or الى الى to s.o. s.th.); to induce (الى ب s.o. to); to instruct, direct, order (الى s.o., ب to do s.th.)
ايعاز ī‘āz advice, counsel, recommendation; suggestion, intimation, hint
ايعازي ī‘āzī advisory, recommendatory, inspiring, inspiratory
به موعز mū‘az bihī inspired, suggested by a higher authority
وعس wa‘asa يعس ya‘isu (wa‘s) to make experienced, make wise (ه s.o.; of fate)
وعس wa‘s pl. اوعاس au‘ās quicksand
ميعاس mī‘ās quicksand
وعظ wa‘aẓa يعظ ya‘iẓu (wa‘ẓ, عظة ‘iẓa) to preach (ه to s.o.), appeal to s.o.’s (ه) conscience; to admonish, exhort (ه s.o.); to warn (ه عن s.o. of), caution (ه عن s.o. against) VIII اتعظ itta‘aẓa to let o.s. be admonished or warned; to accede to an admonition, take advice; to learn a lesson, take a warning (ب from), let s.th. (ب) be a warning
عظة ‘iẓa pl. -āt sermon; lesson, moral; warning; admonition
وعظ wa‘ẓ and وعظة wa‘ẓa admonition; warning; sermon; parsenesis
موعظة mau‘iẓa pl. مواعظ mawā‘iẓ  religious exhortation, spiritual counsel; exhortatory talk, exhortation; stem lecture, severe reprimand
واعظ wā‘iẓ pl. وعاظ wu‘‘āẓ preacher
وعق wa‘q, wa‘iq surly, grumpy, cross; ill- tempered, irritable, peevish, cantankerous, petulant
وعك V to be indisposed, unwell
وعك wa‘ik indisposed, unwell
وعكة wa‘ka indisposition, illness; sultriness
توعك tawa‘‘uk indisposition
موعوك mau‘ūk indisposed, unwell; ill
متوعك mutawa‘‘ik indisposed, unwell;
ill
وعل wa‘l, wa‘il pl. اوعال au‘āl, wu‘ūl mountain goat
وعوع wa‘wa‘ to howl, yelp, bark, bay
وعى wa‘ā يعي ya‘ī (wa‘y) to hold (ھ s.th.); to comprise (ھ s.th.); to contain (ھ s.th.); to retain in one’s memory, remember, know by heart, know (ھ s.th.); to pay attention ( الى or ھ to), heed, bear in mind (الى or ھ s.th.); to perceive, hear (ھ s.th.); to become aware (الى of) │ نفسه على وعى (nafsihī) to dawn on s.o., become clear to s.o.; يعي ال (he is) unconscious; يعي يكاد ال (he is) almost unconscious; يقوله ما يعي ال he doesn’t know what he is saying II to warn, caution (ه من s.o. against) IV to put (ھ s.th. into a vessel or container) V to act with caution, with prudence; to be on one’s guard (من against), beware (من of)
وعي attention, attentiveness, heedfulness, carefulness, advertence; consciousness; awareness; feeling, sentiment, sense; wakefulness, alertness │ وعي غير في unnoticed, without being noticed; قومي وعي (qaumī) national consciousness, nationalism; الوعي وراء ما the subconscious; وعيه استرجع and الى عاد وعيه to regain consciousness, come to; فقد وعيه to lose consciousness, faint, pass out; وعي دون unconscious(ly)
وعاء wi‘ā’ pl. اوعية au‘iya, اواع awā‘in vessel (also anat.), container, receptacle │ دموية اوعية (damawīya) blood vessels
 واع wā‘in attentive, heedful, careful; conscious, in one’s senses, wide awake 1082
wagdān وغدان augād, اوغاد pl. wagd وغد
miserable, wretched; scoundrel
يوغر wagira yagiru, يغر wagara وغر
yaugaru (wagr, wagar) to be hot, be angry
│ على صدره وغر (ṣadruhū) to boil with anger against s.o., harbor malice against s.o., feel hatred for s.o. IV على صدره اوغر (ṣadrahū) to arouse s.o.’s anger against, stir up s.o. against, arouse bitter feelings in s.o. against V to be furious, burn with rage
وغر wagr, wagar anger, wrath, ire, rancor, spite, malice, hatred
وغل wagala يغل yagilu (وغول wugūl) to penetrate deeply (في into); -- (wagl, wugūl, وغالن wagalān) to intrude (على on s.o.), come uninvited (على to) IV to penetrate deeply (في into); to apply o.s. intensively ( في to an activity); to push, press (ه في s.o. into); to burry │ السير في اوغل (sair) to walk briskly, advance quickly; في اوغل الكالم (kalām) to exaggerate, draw a longbow V to penetrate deeply (في into); to advance further and further
وغل wagl intruder, parasite
توغل tawaggul penetration, absorption, preoccupation
واغل wāgil intruder, parasite; extraneous, irrelevant; deep, deep-rooted, deep-seated, inveterate (feeling)
موغل mūgil deep-reaching, deep-rooted وغي wagy, wagan din, clamor, tumult, uproar وفد wafada يفد yafidu (wafd, وفود wufūd, وفادة
wifāda) to come, travel (على or الى to s.o., esp. as an envoy); to arrive (على or الى before s.o., in s.o.’s presence); to visit, come to see (على s.o.), call on s.o. (على) II and IV to send, dispatch (على or ه الى s.o. to, also ھ a delegation); to delegate, depute (على or ه الى s.o. to. also ھ a group) III to come or arrive together (ه with s.o.) VI to arrive together; to throng, flock (على to)
وفد wafd arrival, coming; -- (pl. وفود
wufūd, اوفاد aufād) a delegation, a
deputation; الوفد (formerly, Eg.) the Wafd party
وفدي wafdī of or relative to the Wafd; Wafdist, a member or adherent of the Wafd
وفادة wifāda arrival │ وفادته (احسن) اكرم (wifādatahū) to receive s.o. hospitably, receive s.o. with kindness, treat s.o. with deference
وفود wufūd arrival
ايفاد īfād delegation, deputation, dispatch
وافد wāfid pl. وفود wufūd, اوفاد aufād, وفاد wuffād arriving; (new)comer, arrival; envoy; epidemic(al) (disease); pouring in, coming (ideas, memories)
وافدة wāfida an epidemic
موفد mūfad appointed or nominated for a special assignment; delegate │ الموفد البابوي apostolic delegate
وفر wafara يقر rafiru (wafr, وفور wufūr) and wafura يوفر yaufuru (وفارة wafāra) to abound, be ample, abundant, numerous, plentiful; to increase, augment, grow, become more II to increase, augment, make abundant (ھ s.th.); to give abundantly (ھ ل of s.th. to s.o.); to furnish (ھ evidence, proof); to save (ھ s.th.), be sparing, be economical, hold back, economize (ھ with); to lay by, put by (ھ s.th., esp., money); to save (على ھ s.o. s.th.) │ كثيرة مصاريف عليه وفر to save s.o. a lot of expenses IV to increase, augment (ھ s.th.) V to abound, be ample, abundant, plentiful; to suffice, be sufficient, be enough; to be fulfilled (condition); to be of full value, sterling, up to standard, unexceptionable. valid; to prosper, thrive, be successful; to spare no trouble, go to any length (على in an undertaking or activity), give all one’s attention, devote 1083 o.s. intensively, dedicate o.s. (على to); to be saved │ الالزمة الصفات فيه توفرت he has the necessary qualities; الشروط فيه توفرت he fulfills the conditions VI to be numerous; to abound, be ample, abundant, plentiful; to increase, multiply, grow in number; to be fulfilled (conditions); to fall amply to s.o.’s (ل) share (e.g., qualities) │
 والجمال الشباب فيه توفر (šabāb, jamāl) he is richly endowed with youth and good looks
وفر wafr abundance, wealth; profusion, superabundance; (pl. وفور wufūr, -āt) excess, surplus, overplus; economy; saving
وفرة wafra plenty, abundance, profusion
وفير wafīr abundant, ample
اوفر aufar  more abounding (ھ in); more amply provided or endowed (ھ with); thriftier, more economical │ اوفر حظا (ḥaẓẓan) luckier, more fortunate
توفير taufīr increase, augmentation; raising, raise, rise; economizing, economy; saving │ التوفير صندوق ṣundūq at-t. savings bank
توفر tawaffur abundance, profusion, wealth; superabundance; increase, rise, augmentation, spread, expansion; fulfillment │ توفر عند as soon as the conditions are fulfilled
وافر wāfir ample, abundant, plentiful; numerous, profuse, superabundant; (with foll. genit.) abounding in; overlong (year); الوافر name of a poetic meter
موفور maufūr ample, abundant, plentiful; loaded, swamped; wealthy, moneyed, rich; complete, perfectly intact
│ المطالب موفور m. al-maṭālib having many wishes
متوفر mutawaffir ample, abundant; thrifty, economical; savings yield or interest
متوافر mutawāfir ample, abundant, plentiful, profuse
وفز V to be roused, be alerted X to lie in wait; to be in suspense; to be prepared, be in a state of alertness
وفز wafz, wafaz pl. اوفاز aufāz hurry, haste │ اوفاز على كان to be on one’s toes, be on the alert
مستوفز mustaufiz alert, quick, vivid, lively (e.g., mind); excited
وفض wafaḍa يفض yafiḍu (wafḍ) to run; to hurry, rush
وفض wafḍa pl. وفاض wifāḍ leather bag, traveling bag │ الوفاض خلي empty, vacant, free; empty-handed
وفيعة wafī‘a penwiper
وفق wafiqa يفق yafiqu (wafq) to be right, proper, suitable, fit, appropriate II to make fit, make suitable, adapt, fit, adjust, accommodate (ھ s.th.); to make consistent, bring to agreement, reconcile ( بين different things; وبين --بين s.th. with); to reconcile (بين two parties), make peace, re- establish normal relations (بين between); to give s.o. (ه) success (ل or الى in achieving s.th.; of God); pass. wuffiqa to have success, be successful (ل or الى in or with), have the good fortune, be lucky enough ( الى to), succeed (الى in) │ الى التوفيق كل وفق (wuffiqa kulla t-t.) to succeed completely in, have every success in or with III to befit, become (ه s.o.); to suit (ه s.o.), be suitable, acceptable, agreeable, favorable, convenient (ه to s.o.), be consistent with s.o.’s (ه) wishes or interests; to fit, suit (ه s.o.; garment); to agree (ھ with s.th., ه with s.o., في or على in s.th.); to be agreed, unanimous, of the same opinion, concur ( في or ه على with s.o. in s.th.); to fit (ھ s.th.), be consistent, be in keeping, be in line (ھ with s.th.); to correspond, be analogous (ھ to s.th.); to be in agreement, 1084 be in accordance, be in conformity, be in harmony, go, harmonize (ھ with); to fall in, tally, coincide (ھ with); to agree (ھ with; of food, climate, etc.), be wholesome, beneficial (ھ for); to be conducive (ھ to); to agree, consent, assent, subscribe (على to), grant, confirm, approve, sanction, license, authorize, ratify (على s.th.); to adapt, fit (بين one thing to the other), make consistent, compatible, bring to agreement, reconcile, balance, equilibrate (بين two things) V to be aided, assisted, favored (by God); to have success, be successful, prosper, succeed VIII اتفق ittafaq to agree, come to an agreement, reach an agreement; to agree, be in agreement, in accordance, in conformity, in keeping, in line, in harmony, be consistent, be compatible, coincide, tally, square, fall in line (مع or و with acc.: with): to be agreed, be unanimous; to make a contract, conclude
 an agreement, a treaty, agree on an arrangement; to agree (على on s.th.), arrange (على s.th.), come to terms (على about s.th., مع with s.o.); to chance, happen accidentally, come to pass, occur, happen (ل to s.o., e.g., an oversight); to fan unexpectedly (ل to s.o.), turn out successfully (ل for s.o.) contrary to his expectation; to be given, be destined (ل to s.o.) │ اتفق كما (ka-mā) as chance would have it, at random, haphazardly, carelessly; اتفق كيفما (kaifa-mā) however it may turn out, whatever may come; no matter how, anyway; at any rate, in any case
وفق wafq sufficient amount; sufficiency; agreement, accordance, conformity; harmony, concord; wafq or ل وفقا or وفق من in accordance with, in conformity with, conformable to, according to, commensurate with; in pursuance of, pursuant to, on the strength of, on the basis of │ وفق wafqa l-aṣl true, accurate, exact (copy)
وفقة wafqa: بالوفقة اجر ajr bi-l-w. piece wage, task wage, wage for piecework
اوفق aufaq  more suitable, fitter, more appropriate
توفيق taufīq conformation, adaptation, accommodation; balancing, adjustment, settlement; reconciliation, mediation, arbitration, peacemaking, re-establishment of normal relations; success (granted by God), happy outcome, good fortune, good luck, prosperity, successfulness, succeeding │ التوفيق لجنة lajnat at-t. board of arbitration
وفاق wifāq accordance, conformity, conformance; unity; concord, harmony; consent, assent; agreement, covenant; وفاقا ل in accordance with. in conformity with, conformable to, according to, commensurate with; in pursuance of, pursuant to, on the strength of, on the basic of
موافقة muwāfaqa agreement, conformity, conformance; accordance; correspondence, analogy; suitability, fitness; approval, consent, assent, authorization, sanction
توافق tawāfuq coincidence, congruence, congruity; agreement, conformity, conformance
اتفاق ittifāq coincidence, congruence, congruity; agreement, conformity, conformance; accident, chance; (pl. -āt) covenant, compact, convention, contract; understanding, arrangement, entente; agreement, treaty, pact │ اتفاقا accidentally, by chance, by coincidence; باالتفاق by (mutual) agreement, by appointment; اتفاق اآلراء unanimity; اآلراء باتفاق unanimously; بحري اتفاق (baḥrī) naval agreement; اتفاق تجاري (tijārī) commercial agreement, trade agreement; االعتداء عدم اتفاق itt. ‘adam al- i‘tidā‘ nonaggression pact; االتفاق دول الصغير duwal at-itt. the countries of the Little Entente 1085
اتفاقي ittifāqī accidental, fortuitous, chance; hued on convention, conventional
اتفاقية ittifāqīya pl. -āt agreement, treaty; convention, concordat
موفق muwaffaq successful, prospering, fortunate, lucky
موافق muwāfiq accordant, comfortable, congruous, consistent, concordant, corresponding, analogous; suitable, fit, appropriate; agreeable, acceptable, convenient, favorable, propitious, wholesome, beneficial, conducive
متوفق mutawaffiq successful, proopering, fortunate, lucky
عليه متفق muttafaq ‘alaihi agreed upon
وفى wafā يفي yafī to be perfect, integral, complete, unabridged; -- (وفاء wafā’) to live up (ب or ھ to a promise, an agreement, a vow, or the like), redeem, fulfill, carry out, keep (ب or ھ s.th.); to satisfy, gratify (ب a wish, a desire), supply (ب a need); to serve (ب a purpose); to meet, fulfill, discharge (ب an obligation, an engagement); to pay (a debt); to redeem (a pledge); to cover (costs, expenses); to be sufficient, be enough, suffice (ب for), be adequate (ب to); to make up, compensate fully (ب for), counterbalance (ب s.th.); to be equivalent ( ب to s.th.), fulfill the function (ب of s.th.), substitute (ب for); to realize or carry out (fully, completely; ب s.th.) II to bring up
 to standard, complete, round out (ھ s.th.); to give (ه ھ s.o. s.th.) to the full extent, let
s.o. (ه) have his full share of s.th. (ھ); to present, lit forth, or treat exhaustively (a topic) III to come (ه to s.o.), appear, show up (ه before s.o., in s.o.’s presence); to bring, lake, deliver (ب to s.o. s.th.), supply, provide, furnish (ب s.o. with); to fulfill (ھ s.o.’s wish), comply (ھ with s.o.’s request) │ اجله وافاه (ajaluhū) his fate overtook him IV to give to the full; to fulfill, keep (ب or ھ s.th.), live up (ب or ھ to); to come or draw near s.th. (علي), approach (علي s.th.); to exceed, transcend ( علي s.th.), go beyond (علي اوفى │ (علي االنتھاء to draw to a close; اوفى قد اآلن عمره التاسعة علي (‘umruhū) he is already past nine years of age V to exact fully (ھ s.th.), take one’s full share (ھ of), receive in full (ھ s.th.); ﷲ توفاه God hal taken him unto Him; pass. tuwuffiya to die VI to be complete; to decide unanimously (علي for, in favor of) X to receive in full, exact (fully) (ھ s.th.); to give (fully) (ل ھ to s.o s.th.), let s.o. have his full share of; to complete, bring to a finish (ھ s.th.), go through with s.th. (ھ); to lit out, hear to the end (ھ a program); to bring to its full value (ھ s.th.); to treat exhaustively (ھ a topic); to exhaust (ھ s.th.); to present in detail. at great length (ھ s.th.); to fulfill (ھ the condition); to receive full compensation or indemnity
وفاء wafā’ keeping, fulfillment, redemption (e.g., of a promise); meeting, discharge (of an obligation); payment (of a debt); counterbalance, setoff, compensation; faithfulness fidelity; good faith; loyalty, allegiance; fulfillment, accomplishment, realization, completion
│ ل وفاء wafā’an li in fulfillment of, in discharge of; as an offset to; as a compensation for; النيل وفاء يوم yaum w. an- nīl the Day of the Nile Inundation (popular holiday; Eg.); ل بالوفاء احتفظ to remain loyal to s.o.
وفاة wafāh pl. وفيات wafayāt decease, demise; death; death certificate │ كثرة الوفيات katrat al-w. high mortality, high death rate
وفي wafīy pl. اوفياء aufiyā’  true to one’s word; faithful (lover); reliable,
trustworthy; entire, whole, total, full, complete, integral, perfect 1086
اوفى aufā more faithful, more loyal; more complete, of greater perfection; serving better (ب a purpose), fulfilling better (ب wish, etc.)
توفية taufiya satisfaction; fulfillment, discharge
موافاة muwāfā arrival; communication (
ب of a message)
ايفاء īfā’ fulfillment, discharge; payment
solvent قادرة علي االيفاء │
استيفاء istīfā’ acceptance by the creditor of the performance or payment due (Isl. Law); fulfillment; exhaustive treatment; performance, discharge, accomplishment, execution, consummation, completion; payment
واف wāfin faithful, loyal; full, complete, perfect; quite sufficient, enough; ample, abundant; adequate
موف muwaffin completing, rounding out (a number) │ من (ثالثين) عشرين الموفي في الشھر (šahr) on the 20  (30 ) day of the month
متوفى mutawaffan deceased, dead
وقة wuqqa, wiqqa pl. -āt, وقق wiqaq oka, a weight, see اقة
وقب waqaba يقب yaqibu (waqb) to he sunken, hollow (eye); to become dark, gloomy
وقب waqb pl. اوقاب auqāb cavity; hollow, hole; eye socket, orbit
وقبة waqba cavity
وقت II to appoint, fix, or set a time (ھ for), schedule (ھ s.th.) for a given time; to time (ھ s.th.); to set a time limit (ھ for)
وقت waqt pl. اوقات auqāt time; period of time, time span; moment, instant │ وقتا waqtan once, at one time, one day; بوقته at once, right away, immediately; وقته في on time; at the right time, in good time, timely; وقت غير في at the wrong time, untimely; نفسه الوقت في or الوقت نفس في at the same time, simultaneously; وقت اول في fī awwali waqtin one of these days, at the first opportunity; للوقت or لوقته at once, right away, immediately; الوقت لھذا this
 course the in time, (due) in مع الوقت time; من وقت آلخر gradually; by, and by time, of do.; اوقاتا اوقاتا time; to time from (li-ākara) في كثير sometimes; times, at في بعض األوقات w. وقت الفراغ frequently; often, من األوقات
الوقت time; free sparetime, leisure, al-farāg وقت اوربا الوسطى time; civil (madanī) المدني
w. ūrubbā l-wusṭā Central European time;
الوقت اشارة išārat al-w. time signal (radio)
وقتئذ waqta’idin then, at that time, by then
وقتذاك waqtadāka then, at that time, by then
وقتما waqtamā (conj.) while, as
وقتي waqtī temporal, of time; time- (in compounds); temporary; passing, transient, transitory; provisional, interim; momentary; وقتيا for some time, for a short time │ وقتي تصوير time exposure (phot.)
mawāqit مواقت pl. mauqit موقت
appointed time; appointment, date
ميقات mīqāt pl. مواقيت mawāqīt appointed time; date, deadline; time; season, time of the year; meeting point, rendezvous; pl. times of departure and arrival, timetable │ األفالم مواقيت business hours; الحج موقيت m. al-hajj rendezvous points and times of the Mecca pilgrims
│ time of reckoning timing; tauqīt توقيت time; daylight-saving (ṣaifī) توقيت صيفي في الساعة time; local (maḥallī) توقيت محلي at g.) t. (ḥasaba العاشرة حسب توقيت جرينش
10.00 hours Greenwich mean time
موقوت mauqūt appointed, bed, set (time); temporary; limited in time,
1087 scheduled for a given time; provided with a time fuse (bomb)
موقت muwaqqit timing, determining the time; timekeeper, timetaker; controller
موقت muwaqqat and مؤقت mu’aqqat scheduled for a given time or hour; appointed, fixed, lilt (time); effective for a certain time, for a time only, temporal, temporary, passing, transient, transitory, provisional, interim I l:i.	temporarily,
provisionally, for the time being; بصورة موقتة (bi-ṣūra) do.; موقتة حكومة provisional government
وقح waqaḥa يقح yaqiḥu (قحة qiḥa, qaḥa), waquḥa يوقح yauquḥu (وقاحة waqāḥa, وقوحة wuqūḥa) and waqiḥa yauqaḥu (waqaḥ) to be shameless, impudent, insolent V do.; to behave impudently (على toward s.o.), display insolent manners VI to display impudence, behave in an insolent manner
قحة qiḥa impudence, shamelessness, insolence, impertinence, sauciness
وقح waqiḥ impudent, shameless, insolent, impertinent, saucy, cheeky, forward
وقاح waqāḥ (m. and f.) pl. وقح wuquḥ impudent, shameless, insolent, impertinent, saucy, cheeky, forward
وقيح waqāḥa impudent, shameless, insolent, impertinent, saucy, cheeky, forward
وقاحة waqāḥa impudence, insolence, impertinence, sauciness, cheek, nerve
وقوحة wuqūḥa impudence, insolence, impertinence, sauciness, cheek, nerve
وقد waqada يقد yaqidu (waqd, waqad, وقود wuqūd) to take fire, ignite, burn II and IV to kindle, ignite, light (ھ s.th.) │ فيه اوقد النار (nāra) to set s.th. on fire V = I; to kindle, light, ignite (ھ s.th.) VIII اتقد ittaqada = I; to break forth (anger), be aroused (zeal) │ على (حماسا) غيرة اتقد (gairatan, ḥamāsan) to burn with zeal (enthusiasm) for X to kindle, light, ignite ( ھ s.th.)
وقد waqd, waqad burning, combustion; fire; fuel
وقدة waqda fire; blaze
وقاد wiqād fuel
وقاد waqqād burning, fiery; lively, heated; bright, brilliant, radiant (star); (pl.
-ūn) stoker
وقود waqūd fuel (also for motors) │ الوقود مخزن makzan al-w. coal cellar, coal storeroom
وقيد waqīd fuel
موقد mauqid pl. مواقد mawāqid  fireplace; hearth; stove; O boiler of a locomotive │ الغاز موقد kerosene stove
 ليقاد īqād kindling, lighting, setting on fire, ignition
توقد tawaqqud burning, combustion اتقاد ittiqād burning, combustion موقود mauqūd kindled, lit, ignited,
burning
متوقد mutawaqqid burning, flaming, blazing │ الذھن متوقد m. ad-dihn fiery, impulsive, having a lively mind
متقد muttaqid aflame, burning
مستوقد mustauqad hearth, fireplace; O hath heater, geyser
وقذ waqada يقذ yaqidu (waqd) to hit fatally, hit hard, throw down, fell (ه s.o.)
وقيذ waqīd and موقوذ mauqūd fatally ill
وقر waqara يقر yaqiru (waqr) to break, fracture, crack (ھ s.th., esp. a bone); to be settled, certain, an established fact; to stay, remain │ ان نفسه في وقر to him it was an established fact that ...; خلده في وقر (kaladihī) do.; نفسه في الصورة وقرت (ṣūratu) the picture stood vividly 1088 before his mental eye; waqura يوقر yauquru (وقار waqār, وقارة waqāra) to be dignified, sedate, staid, grave II to respect, honor, revere, reverence (ه s.o.); to render grave or sedate (ه s.o.) IV to load, burden, overload (ھ a beast of burden); to oppress (ه s.o.), weigh heavily (ه upon); to be overladen with fruit (tree)
وقر waqr pl. وقور wuqūr cavity, hollow
وقرة waqra cavity, hollow
وقر wiqr pl. اوقار auqār heavy load, burden
وقار waqār gravity, sobriety, dignity, deportment commanding respect; sedateness, dignified bearing
وقور waqūr grave, sedate; dignified; venerable, reverend
توقر tawaqqur dignified bearing
موقر muwaqqar respected, held in respect; venerable, reverend
وقص waqaṣa يقص yaqiṣu to break s.o.’s neck (
)ھ
وقظ waqaẓa يقظ yaqiẓu (waqẓ) to beat brutally ( ه s.o.) II to arouse, incite, inflame, whip up (ھ s.th., e.g., passions)
وقع waqa‘a يقع yaqa‘u (وقوع wuqū‘) to fall; to fall down, drop; to tumble; to come to pass, take place, occur; to happen (ل to s.o.), befall (ل s.o.); to get (في in a situation, also, e.g., in a fix); to get (الى to), arrive (الى at); to come, run (علي across), meet (علي with); to fall (علي to s.o., to s.o.’s lot or share); to slight, settle down (علي on: bird); to have sexual intercourse (علي with a woman); to be divided (في into), consist (في of); to be located, be situated, lie (geog.,); -- (وقيعة waqī‘a) to slander, backbite, defame, disparage (من or ب s.o.): -- (waq‘) to rush, pounce, fall (ب upon s.o.) │ بعضھم في وقعوا they fell to quarreling, they fell out with one another; بايديھم وقع (bi-aidīhim) he fell into their hands; حواسه تحت وقع (ḥawāssihī) to enter s.o.’s range of perception, become palpable, tangible for s.o.; حبه في وقعت (ḥubbihī) she fell in love with him; وقعت حرب (ḥarb) war broke out; الحق وقع (ḥaqq) the law has been determined; عليه الحق وقع he was found guilty; الفخ في وقع (fakk) to walk into the trap, get caught in the snare; فريسته وقع (farīsatahū) to fall victim to s.o., become a prey of s.o.; مكان في قلبه من وقع (min qalbihī fī makānin) to take s.th. to heart; to make s.th. one’s business, attend to s.th.; عليه القول وقع (qaul) he was called upon to speak, he was given the floor; وقع ان نفسه في it came to his mind, it occurred to him to ...; في الكالم وقع (kalām) the words impressed him, went to his heart, touched him; نفسه (من) في وقعت she has made an impression on him, she has bewitched him; ھواھا في وقع (hawāhā) he fell in love with her; موقعه وقع (mauqi‘ahū) to stand in place of, stand for; موقعه غير في وقع (fī gairi mauqi‘ihī) to be misplaced, stand in the wrong place, be used in the wrong context (word); موقعا منه الكالم وقع (kalāmu, mauqi‘an) the words moved or impressed him; حسنا موقعا منه األمر وقع (mauqi‘an ḥasanan) the matter pleased him very much, was most welcome to him; عنده وقع الرضا موقع (mauqi‘a r-riḍā) it met his approval; جليال موقعا النفوس في وقع to leave a strong, splendid impression; ووقع وقع االستغراب to cause raised eyebrows, cause
 astonishment II to let fall, drop (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to cause to fall, bring down, throw down, overthrow (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to perform, carry out, execute (ھ s.th.); to enter, record, register (علي or ھ في s.th. in or on); to 1089 sign (ھ s.th.); to inflict ( ھ علي a punishment on s.o.); to play (علي on a musical instrument); to sow dissension (بين between, among) │ وقع على حجزا (ḥajzan) to seize, confiscate,
impound or distrain s.th.; األولى باألحرف وقعه (bi-l-aḥrufi l-ūlā) to initial s.th.; نفسه وقع (nafsahū) to give o.s. up; الوتر على وقع الحساس (al-watar al-ḥassās) to touch the sensitive spot III to attack (ه s.o.), fight (ه with); to have sexual intercourse (ھا with a woman) IV to let fall, drop (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to cause to fall, bring down, throw down, overthrow (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to plunge (ه في s.o. into s.th., esp. fig.), get, land (ه في s.o. in a situation); to fall (ب upon s.o.), attack, assault (ب s.o.); to score a hit (ب on); to sow the seeds of discord, drive wedge (وبين -- بين between -- and); to project (ھ s.th.) │ قلبه في الرعب اوقع (ar- ru‘ba fī qalbihī) to strike terror to s.o.’s heart, frighten or scare s.o.; علي عقوبة اوقع to inflict a punishment on; كمين في اوقعه to let s.o. walk into an ambush V to expect, anticipate (ھ s.th.); to prepare o.s., wait (ھ for); to dread (ھ s.th.); to be inflicted (علي on s.o.; punishment), be passed (علي against s.o.; judgment) X to expect, anticipate, dread (ھ s.th.), feel uneasy, be concerned (ھ about), look forward with apprehension (ھ to)
وقع waq‘ falling, dropping, tumbling; fall, drop, tumble; thump, thud, blow; happening, occurrence, incidence; impression (s.th. makes), effect; impact │ األقدام وقع footfall, footsteps; ثقلية اقدام وقع heavy footfall; النفوس في وقع احسن له كان (aḥsanu waq‘in) to make the best impression on everyone
وقعة waq‘a pl. waqa‘āt fall, drop, tumble; thump, thud, blow; shock, jolt; incident, occurrence; encounter, combat, battle; meal, repast
waqqā‘a وقاعة and waqqā‘ وقاع
talebearer, scandalmonger, slanderer
وقوع wuqū‘ falling, fall, tumble; letting in, incidence (of an event), occurence, happening
وقيعة waqī‘a pl. وقائع waqā’i‘ incident, event, occurrence, happening; encounter, battle; -- pl. وقائع happenings, goings on, developments; factual findings, factual evidence, facts (of a legal case); proceedings (of an assembly); facts │ دفتر الوقائع daftar al-w. minute book; الوقائع المصرية (miṣrīya) the Egyptian Official Gazette (the oldest Arab newspaper)
موقع mauqi‘ pl. مواقع mawāqi‘  place where s.th. drops or fells down; place, site, locality, spot; position (of a ship and mil.); scene, situation, location, position; impression; time or date on which s.th. falls │ األطالل مواقع (sites of) ruins; مواقع األنظار m. anẓār field (or range) of vision; متقدم موقع (mutaqaddim) advanced position (mil.); النجوم مواقع the orbits of the stars; لم الليل من ذاك وقته موقع يعرف يكن (mauqi‘a waqtihī) he did not know what time of the night it was at that moment; see also waqa‘a (at end of illustrative phrases)
mawāqi‘  مواقع pl. mauqi‘a موقعة
battlefield; fighting, combat, battle
ميقعة mīqa‘a device for sharpening or honing; grindstone, whetstone
توقيع tauqī‘ dropping; performance, consummation, execution; discharge, undertaking (of an act or action); infliction (of a punishment); entering, recording, registration; (pl. -āt) signature │ بتوقيع
فالن (توقيع تحت) signed by, from the pen of; التوقيع مھمل (muhmal) without signature, unsigned
توقيعي tauqī‘ī rhythmic(al)
وقاع wiqā‘ coition, sexual intercourse ايقاع īqā‘ pl. -āt rhythm; projection ايقاعي īqā‘ī rhythmic(al) 1090
توقع tawaqqu‘ expectation; anticipation
واقع wāqi‘ falling, dropping, tumbling; occurring, happening; actual, real, factual; material, corporeal, tangible; event, fact, matter of fact; factual findings, factual evidence, facto; located, situated (geogr.); transitive (gram.); الواقع reality, the real, material world │ واقعا wāqi‘an or الواقع في
 or األمر واقع في in effect, indeed, as a matter of fact, actually, really, in reality; بواقع bi- wāqi‘i to the .mount of (with foll. figure); واقع غير untrue, unreal; intransitive (gram.);
الواقع األمر the accomplished fact; واقع الحال factual findings, factual evidence, facts; ان الواقع (anna) it is a fact that ..., as a matter of fact ..., actually ...; بكثير الواقع دون (dūna, bi-katīrin) far from being true; من السجالت ھذه واقع (sijillāt) according to the data contained in these registers
واقعة wāqi‘a incident, occurrence, event; happening, development; fact; accident, mishap; fighting, combat, battle
واقعي wāqi‘ī actual, real; de facto; realistic; positive; positlvistic (philos.)
واقعية wāqi‘īya reality
موقع muwaqqi‘ signing; signer, signatory
موقع muwaqqa‘ entered, recorded, registered; signed
متوقع mutawaqqa‘ expected, anticipated; supposed, presumable, probable, likely │ المتوقع من it is expected that ...
وقف waqafa يقف yaqifu (waqf, وقوف wuqūf) to come to a standstill, come to a stop; to stand still; to place o.s. post o.s., station o.s., take one’s stand, step (فوق on s.th.), stand (فوق on, دون in the way of s.th.); to stop (عند or علي at; الى at, short of,
= to reach, extend to, go as far as); to halt; to pause; to hesitate, waver, have doubts or scruples (في in s.th.); to use the pausal form, pronounce a word without i‘rāb ending (gram.); to rise, get up, stand up, get on one’s feet; to plant o.s., station o.s., stand erect, hold o.s. erect; to stand; to stand on end (hair); to withstand, resist, oppose; to take up position (علي .t); to stand (مع by s.o.), stick (مع to s.o.), side (مع with s.o.), support, back (مع s.o.); with foll. participle; to continue to do s.th., keep doing s.th.; -- (wuqūf) to occupy o.s. (علي with), attend (علي to), go in for (علي); to read (علي s.th.); to apply o.s., devote o.s. (علي to); to take an interest, be interested ( علي in); to inquire, seek information, inform o.s. (علي about); to learn, be
informed (علي of); to understand, comprehend, grasp, learn (علي s.th.); to come to know (علي s.th.). become acquainted (Jo with); to know (علي s.th.); (waqf) to bring to a standstill, to a stop, arrest, halt, stop (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), put an end (ھ to s.th.); to hinder, prevent, hold back (ه ھ، or ب s.o., s.th., دون or عن from); to make dependent, conditional (ھ على s.th. on), pass. wuqifa to depend, be conditional (على on); to apprise, inform, notify (ه على s.o. of), acquaint (ه على s.o. with), let s.o. (ه) know (على about); to tell, advise, instruct (ھ على s.o. about), call s.o.’s (ه) attention (على to); to donate, grant, create, institute (ه على s.th. for a pious or charitable purpose), bequeath as a religious endowment or wakf (ھ على s.th. to); to make over, bequeath, transfer (على ھ s.th. to); to dedicate, consecrate, devote (ھ على s.th. to a purpose); to assign, appoint (ھ s.th., ل to, to a purpose), designate, set apart (ھ s.th., ل for s.th., for a purpose); to apply, devote (نفسه nafsahū o.s., ل to s.th., to a task) │ قف qif halt! (command); stop! (e.g., on a traffic sign); امامه وقف (amāmahū) to resist, oppose, stop s.th., put an end to s.th.; جانبه الى وقف to be on s.o.’s side; 1091 يساره الى وقف (yasārihī) to stand at his lef<t;<< <<< وقف (saddan) to rise as an obstacle in the way to s.th., stand in the way to s.th.; شيء دون يقف ال nothing will stand in his (or its) way, nothing can stop him (or it); حائرا وقف to be in a quandary, at a loss what to do; وقف الحياد علي (ḥiyād) to remain neutral,  observe strict neutrality; ل الجد ساق علي وقف (sāqi l-jidd) to throw o.s. into s.th., identify o.s. with s.th., go to great lengths, make every effort in order to ...; علي وقف الھالك شفير (šafīri l-halāk) to be on the  brink of ruin, be about to perish; عند وقف حد ... (ḥaddi) to stop at or short of …, go as far as ...; فالن وجه في وقف ... (wajhi s.) to offer s.o. resistance, stand up against s.o.; من موقفا وقف (mauqifan) to assume an attitude, take a stand toward or with regard to; الحزم ملؤه موقفا وقف (mil’uhū l- ḥazm) to assume an attitude of utmost determination; وقفا وقف (waqfan) to assume a posture; وقفة وقف (waqfatan) to stand still; to assume an attitude; العمل على وقفه (‘amal) to suspend s.o. from duty II to
 bring to a standstill, to a stop, arrest, halt, stop, hold up, check, stunt, obstruct, trammel, hamper, slow down (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to park (ھ an automobile); to raise, erect, set up, set upright, place in an upright position (ھ s.th.); to arrest, seize (ه s.o.); to hold back, restrain, keep, prevent (ه عن s.o. from); to acquaint (ه علي s.o. with); to institute a religious endowment or wakf (علي for the benefit of, in favor of)
│ حده عند وقفه (ḥaddihī) to put s.o. in his proper place IV to make (ھ s.th.) stand, set up (ھ s.th.); to bring to a standstill, to a stop, arrest, halt, stop, hold up, check, stunt, obstruct, trammel, hamper, slow down (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to stop, suspend, stay, discontinue, interrupt (ھ s.th.); to break off, sever (ھ relations); to postpone, put off, delay, defer (ھ an activity); to arrest, seize, apprehend, capture (ه s.o.); to suppress, ban (ھ a newspaper); to acquaint (ه علي s.o. with), inform, notify, apprise (
ه علي s.o. of), let s.o. (ه) know (علي about); to tell, advise, instruct (ه علي s.o. about), call s.o.’s (ه) attention (علي to); to donate, grant, create, institute (ه علي s.th. for a pious or charitable purpose), bequeath as a religious endowment or wakf (ھ علي s.th. to); to bequeath, make over, transfer (علي ھ s.th. to); to assign, appoint (ھ علي s.th. to), designate, set apart (ھ علي s.th. for); to devote (ھ علي s.th. to a purpose); to spend (ھ efforts, علي for) │ علي اھتمامه اوقف (htimāmahū) to concentrate on; تنفيذ اوقف الحكم (tanfīd l-ḥukm) to stay the execution of a sentence, grant a reprieve; to stay the execution (of a judgment in a civil case), arrest a judgment (jur.); المرور حركة اوقف (ḥarakata l-murūr) to obstruct traffic; اوقفه المرور عن (‘amal) to relieve s.o. of his post, remove s.o. from office V to stop, halt, come to a stop, put in a stop, stop over; to come to a standstill; to stand still; to reach a deadlock (fig., of negotiations, and the like); to pause (عن in an activity), suspend, interrupt (عن s.th.); to stop, quit (عن s.th., doing s.th.), discontinue (عن s.th.); to desist, refrain, abstain (عن from); to waver, be undecided, hesitate (في in s.th.); to depend, be dependent, conditional (علي on); to rest, be based (علي on), be due (علي to); to consist (علي in) VI to fight each other; to meet in battle X to ask (ه s.o.) to
stop; to bring to a stop, to stop, halt, hold up, detain, check, impede, obstruct, trammel, hamper, slow down (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.), stunt, arrest (ھ s.th.); to give s.o. (ه) pause; to call on a vessel (ھ) to stop; to try to hold or retain; to hold (ھ s.th.; fig.) │ نظره استوقف (naẓarahū) to catch s.o.’s eye, arouse s.o.’s attention; االنتباه استوقف to arrest the attention 1092
وقف waqf stopping, stop; halting, halt; discontinuation, suspensions, stay, standstill; pausing, resting; stagnation, dullness, listlessness (of the market); pause (gram.); checking, restraining, prevention; interruption, hitch, impediment, obstacle, obstruction; suspension from duty, removal from office, discharge, dismissal; blocking (of all account), stoppage (of salaries); -- (pl. اوقاف auqāf) religious endowment, wakf, “habeus” (Isl. Law); endowment (in general), endowment fund; unalienable property │ علي وقفا كان (waqfan) to be completely dependent on; علي وقفا restricted to; اھلي وقف (ahlī), خاص وقف (kāṣṣ) or (ir.) ذرية وقف w. durrīya family endowment, private will, estate in mortmain entailed in such a manner that its proceeds will accrue to the members of the donor’s family, and, after the death of its last descendent, go to a charitable purpose; خيري وقف (kairī), (tun.) عام وقف (‘āmm) public endowment, endowment, set apart for a charitable or religious purpose, public wakf; الوقف ناظر nāẓir al-
w. administrator of all endowment, trustee, curator; األوقاف the wakf system, estates in mortmain; األوقاف وزارة the ministry entrusted with government supervision of estates in mortmain, will ministry; النار اطالق وقف w. iṭlāq an-nār cease-fire (mil.); التنفيذ وقف stay of execution (jur.); الوقف خبز اكل (kubza l-w.) to have independent means of subsistence, have a sinecure
وقفي waqfī of or pertaining to endowments or the wakf system, wakf- (in compounds)
وقفية waqfīya wakf system, endowment system; list of religious endowments, of the estates in mortmain; original charter of a wakf
 وقفة waqfa (n. vic.) pl. -āt standing, stand, stance; position, posture; halt, stop; pause; 0 period, full stop (punctuation mark); station, way station, specif. that on Mount ‘Arafāt during the Pilgrimage; attitude, stand, policy; eve of a religious festival, also الصغير العيد وقفة │ الوقفة يوم w. al-‘īd aṣ-ṣagīr the day preceding ‘īd al- fiṭr, the Feast of Breaking the Ramadan Fast on the last day of Shawwal; العيد وقفة الكبير (kabīr) the day preceding ‘īd al-aḍḥā the Feast of Immolation on the 10  day of Zu’lhijja
وقاف waqqāf overseer, supervisor, warden, keeper
وقوف wuqūf stopping, stop; halting, halt; standing; stand, stance; (with علي:) study, pursuit, occupation (with), search, inquiry (into), investigation, cognizance, knowledge, understanding, comprehension; (Isl. Law) abeyance of rights; pl. of واقف wāqif standing
موقف mauqif pl. مواقف mawāqif  stopping place; station; (cab, etc.) stand; (bus, train, etc.) stop; parking lot, parking place; stopover, stop; place, site; scene, scenery; position, posture; situation; attitude; stand, position, opinion │ موقف
<<<< (ḥarbī) strategic situation; موقف سياسي (siyāsī) political situation; عدائي موقف (‘adā’ī) hostile attitude; الموقف مھيمن muhaimin al-m. master of the situation;
من موقفه his attitude toward, his stand with regard to
توقيف tauqīf raising, setting up, erection; apprehension, detention, seizure, arrest; parking
ايقاف īqāf raising, setting up, erection; apprehension, detention, seizure, arrest; stopping, halting, checking, arresting, stunting, trammeling, hampering, impeding, obstruction; stoppage, suspension (e.g., of work); interruption, discontinuation; postponement, deferment, delay, stay, arrest; removal from office, suspension from duty; notice, notification
│ 1093 التنفيذ ايقاف stay of execution (jur.);
الحكم ايقاف i. al-ḥukm arrest of judgment
(jur.); الدعوى ايقاف ī. ad-da‘wā stay of proceedings (jur.); الدفع ايقاف ī. ad-daf‘
delay of payment, respite, moratorium;
العمل ايقاف ī. al-‘amal suspension of work
توقف tawaqquf halt, cessation, standstill; pause; stopover, stop (also. of an airplane); hesitation, wavering; dependence (على on) │ الدفع عن التوقف (daf‘) suspension of payment (jur.)
واقف wāqif stopping, baiting, coming to a stop; standing still, motionless, at rest; standing; upright, erect; acquainted, familiar (علي with s.th.); bystander, spectator, onlooker (during a street scene); wakif, donor of a wakf │ الواقف علي instantly, on the spot, right away, at once; واقفا ھب habba wāqifan to get on one’s feet, get up, stand up, rise
موقوف mauqūf arrested, stopped; suspended; interrupted, discontinued; delayed, postponed, deferred; apprehended, detained, arrested; person under arrest, prisoner; suspended from duty, removed from office; entailed through an endowment, established as a wakf; unalienable, in mortmain; donated, granted, instituted; dedicated. devoted; designated, set apart, reserved (علي for); dependent, conditional (علي on); based, resting (علي on); abeyant, in abeyance (rights; Isl. Law) │ عليه الموقوف beneficiary or usufructuary of a wakf; الموقوفة األراضي (arāḍī) the estates in mortmain; العب موقوف disqualified player (athlet.); موقوف المحاكمة قيد (qaida l-muḥākama) detained pending investigation. committed for trial
متوقف mutawaqqif dependent, conditional (على on)
وقل V to climb, mount
 وقواق waqwāq and واقواق wāqwāq in the descriptions of Arab geographers, name of two different groups of islands (one east of China, the other located in the Indian Ocean)
 وقوق waqwaq cuckoo
 وقى waqā يقي yaqī (waqy, وقاية wiqāya) to guard, preserve (ھ s.th.), take good care ( ھ of); to safeguard, shield, shelter, preserve, protect, keep (ه ھ s.o. from), guard (ه ھ s.o. against); to protect, offer or afford protection (ھ against); to prevent, obviate (ھ a danger) V and VIII
 اتقى ittaqā to beware, be wary (ھ of), guard, be on one’s guard, protect o.s. make suer (ھ against) │ ﷲ اتقى to fear God; الشيء حق في ﷲ اتقى (ḥaqqi) (lit.: to fear God with regard to s.th., i.e.) to spare s.th. or deal mercifully with s.th. for fear of God, show regard for s.th. for God’s sake, make s.th. a matter of conscience
وقي waqī protection; safeguard
وقاء waqā’, wiqā‘ protection; prevention
وقاية wiqāya protection; prevention; precaution; obviation, averting; defense ( من against); prophylaxis (mat.) │ من الوقاية الجوية الغارات (jawwīya) anti-aircraft defense; الوقاية معدات mu‘addāt al-w. safety device
وقاية waqqāya protective covering
الطب الوقائي │ preventive wiqā’ī وقائي
(ṭibb) preventive medicine, prophylaxis
وقي waqīy protecting; protector, preserver, guardian
تقوى taqwā godliness, devoutness, piety تقى tuqan godliness, devoutness, piety تقي taqīy pl. اتقياء atqiyā’ godfearing,
godly, devout, pious
تقية taqīya fear, caution, prudence; (in Shiitic Islam) dissimulation of one’s religion (under duress or in the face of threatening damage) 1094
واق wāqin preserving, guarding, protecting; preventive, preservative, prophylactic; protective; guardian, protector │ الريح من واق (rīḥ) protecting from the wind; واق درع (dir‘) protective armor; واقية صفحة (ṣafḥa) flyleaf; dust cover, jacket, wrapper; واقية مظلة (miẓalla) parachute; واق معطف (mi‘ṭaf) raincoat; قناع واق gas mask
واقية wāqiya protection, shelter, shield; a preventive, a preservative
متق muttaqin godfearing, godly, devout, pious
 □ وقية wiqīya (eg.), wuqīye (Syr.) a weight, in Eg. = 1/12 raṭl = 37 g; in Aleppo = 320 g, in Beirut = 213.39 g, in Jerusalem = 240g
وكأ V and VIII اتكأ ittaka’a to support one’s weight (على on), lean (على against, on); to recline (على in a chair, and the like)
تكأة tuka’a staff; support, prop, stay; back (of a chair, etc.); idler, lazybones
توكؤ tawakku’ resting, leaning, reclining اتكاء ittikā’ resting, leaning, reclining متكأ muttaka’ pl. -āt support, prop, stay;
cushion, pad; sofa; couch
وكب wakaba يكب yakibu (wakb, وكوب wukūb, وكبان wakabān) to walk slowly, proceed or advance slowly III to accompany (ه s.o.), escort (ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to convoy, accompany as military escort (ھ s.th.)
موكب maukib pl. مواكب mawākib   parade, pageant; procession; mounted escort, retinue, cortege; triumph │ موكب المشاعيل torchlight procession; الجنازة موكب
m. al-janāza funeral procession
مواكبة muwākaba military escort, convoying, convoy duty
وكد II to make fast, fasten (ھ s.th.); to corroborate, substantiate (ھ s.th.); to confirm, affirm (ھ s.th.); to give assurance (ھ of), assert (ھ s.th.) V to be corroborated, substantiated, asserted, affirmed, confirmed; to ascertain (من a fact), make sure, convince o.s. (من of)
وكد wakd wish, desire, intention, aim, goal, end, purpose, object, aspiration, endeavor, effort, attempt
وكيد wakīd corroborated, substantiated, confirmed; sure, certain; positive
توكيد taukīd pl. -āt, تواكيد tawākīd  confirmation; affirmation, assurance; assertion; emphasis, stress; (gram.) intensifying apposition; pleonasm
موكد muwakkad sure, certain, definite
متوكد mutawakkid sure, certain, positive, convinced
وكر wakr pl. اوكار aukār, وكور wukūr nest, bird’s nest; aerie; habitation, abode, retreat; O aircraft hangar │ اللصوص وكر den of robbers
وكرة wakra pl. وكر wukar bird’s nest
 وكز wakaza يكز yakizu (wakz) to strike with the fist (ه s.o.); to thrust, push, hit; to spur (ھ a horse); to pierce, transfix (ه ب s.o. with)
وكس wakaaa يكس yakisu (waks) to decline in value, depreciate; to decrease, diminish, reduce, lower (ھ the value or price of); pass. wukisa to suffer losses (in business) II to decrease, diminish, reduce, lower (ھ the value of)
وكس waks decline, drop (of value or price); depreciation; loss │ بالوكوس باغ to sell at a loss
وكع waku‘a يوكع yauku‘u (وكاعة wakā‘a) to be hard, strong, sturdy
ميكعة mīka‘a plowshare 1095
وكف wakafa يكف yakifu (wakf, وكفان wakafān) to drip, trickle; to be defective and
leak
وكف wakf leaking, leak (of a ship)
وكل wakala يكل yakilu (wakl and وكول wukūl) to entrust (ھ الى s.th. to s.o., with s.th. s.o.), assign (ھ الى s.th. to s.o.), commission, charge (الى ھ s.o. with), put s.o. (الى) in charge (ھ of) II to authorize, empower, appoint as representative or agent (ه s.o.); to put s.o. (ه) in charge (ب of) engage as legal counsel (ه an attorney, عن or ب in a matter in dispute); to invest s.o. (ه) with full power, give s.o. power of attorney (في in); to entrust (ه ب to s.o. s.th.) III to be on a confidential basis (ه with s.o.), be in a position of mutual trust (ه with s.o.); to trust (ه s.o.) IV to entrust, assign (ھ الى s.th., a task, to s.o.) V to be appointed as representative or agent, take over or act as (legal) representative; to act as commissioner, as agent, or by proxy (في in s.th.); to take upon o.s. assume (ب s.th.); to be responsible, answerable, answer, vouch (ب for), guarantee, warrant (ب s.th.); to rely, depend (على on), place one’s confidence (على in), trust (على in) │ توكل
ﷲ على to trust in God, put o.s. in God’s hands VI to trust each other; to react with indifference, be noncommital, indifferent VIII اتكل ittakala to rely, depend (على on), trust (على in)
وكيل wakīl pl. وكالء wukalā’  authorized representative, attorney in fact, proxy;
(business) manager; head clerk; deputy, vice-; agent; trustee; mandatary, defense counsel; attorney, lawyer; (Syr., mil.) approx.: technical sergeant │ األحباس وكيل in Tunis, commissioner for estates in mortmain; البابوي الوكيل (bābawī) papal legate; امين بلوك وكيل w. bulūk amīn (1939 امين وكيل) approx.: quartermaster corporal (mil.; Eg.); اونباشي وكيل w. onbāšī (1939 محارب وكيل w. muḥārib) private first class (Eg.); باشجاويش وكيل staff sergeant (Eg.); مجاھد وكيل ٩٣٩١) شاويش وكيل جاويش، وكيل w. mujāhid) sergeant; ضابط وكيل noncommissioned officer (Tun.); company sergeant-major, master sergeant (Syr., mil.); العام الحق وكيل w. al-ḥaqq al-‘āmm government commissioner at Tunisian courts (Tun.); قنصل وكيل w. qunṣul vice- consul; مدير وكيل w. mudīr deputy director; الوزارة وكيل under-secretary of state
تكلة tukala one who relies on others, who is incapable of attending to his own affairs
وكالة wakāla pl. -āt representation, deputyship, proxy; full power, power of attorney; management; agency; (Eg.) inn, caravansary, resthouse, khan │ األنباء وكالة
w. al-anbā’ news agency, wire service;
اإلشھار وكالة w. al-išhār advertising agency
نوكيل taukīl appointment as representative, agent, deputy, or proxy, delegation of authority; authorization; power of attorney, full power; warrant of attorney
توكل tawakkul trust, confidence; trust in God; passivity of living (of the early ascetics and mystics)
تواكل tawākul mutual confidence or trust; indifference
اتكال ittikāl trust, confidence, reliance
موكل muwakkil constituent, principle, mandator
موكل muwakkal commissioned, charged (ب with), in charge (ب of), responsible, answerable (ب for)
متوكلي mutawakkilī: اليمنية المتوكلية المملكة (mamlaka, yamanīya) the Yemenite Kingdom (official designation)
موكم mūkim offensive, hurting (word) 1096
 وكن wacana يكن yakinu (wakn, وكون wukūn) to brood, Bit on its eggs (bird); to hatch, incubate (على or ھ eggs)
وكن wakn pl. وكون wukūn bird’s nest, aerie
وكنة wakna, wukna pl. wukunāt nest
وكى wakā يكي yakī to tie up (ھ a waterskin, or the like)
وكاء wikā’ pl. اوكية aukiya thong or string for tying up a waterskin or bag
ولج walaja يلج yaliju (لجة lija, ولوج wulūj) to enter (الى or ھ s.th., into s.th.), penetrate ( الى or ھ into) │ الباب ولج to go in by the door IV to make (ھ s.th.) enter (في s.th. else); to introduce, insert, interpose, intromit, interpolate, thrust (ھ في s.th. into) V = I; to engage (ھ in), take upon
o.s. (ھ s.th.)
ولوج wulūj penetration, entering, entry
وليجة walija intimate friend, confidant; secret depth (of the heart)
ايالج ilei; insertion, intromission, interposition, interpolation, intercalation
مولج maulij pl. موالج mawālij  entrance
ملح see موالح
ولد walada يلد yalidu (والدة wilāda, لدة lida, مولد maulid) to bear (ه a child), give birth (ه to); to beget, generate, procreate; to bring forth, produce (ھ s.th.) │ منه ولدت to have  a child by s.o. (woman) II to assist in childbirth (ھا a woman; of a midwife); to generate, produce (ه من s.th. from); to engender, breed, cause, occasion, (ھ s.th.); to bring up, raise (ه a child) IV to make (ھا a woman) bear children │ طفال اولدھا (ṭiflan) he got her with child V to be born; to be descended (من from s.o.); to be generated, produced (من from), be brought forth, be engendered, bred, caused, occasioned (من by); to originate, grow, develop, arise, proceed, follow, result (من from) VI to propagate, reproduce, multiply by generation X to want children; to want the generation (ھ من of s.th. from), want to produce (ھ من s.th. from)
ولد walad pl. اوالد aulād, ولد wuld descendant, offspring, scion; child; son; boy; young animal, young one; (coll.)
progeny, offspring, children │ الزنا ولد w. az-zinā illegitimate child, bastard; ولد المالعنة w. al-mulā‘ana child whose paternity is contested by لعان li‘ān (q.v.) (Isl. Law)
ولدة walda childbirth, birth │ اثنين ولدت ولدة في she gave birth to two at a time
لدة lida childbirth, birth; (pl. لدون lidūn, لدات lidāt) person of the same age, contemporary; coetaneous
والدة wilāda parturition, childbearing, childbirth, birth, confinement, delivery │ معجلة والدة (mu‘ajjala) premature birth; الوالدة حديث newborn; الوالدة علم ‘ilm al-w. obstetrics (med.)
والدة wallāda frequently producing offspring, bearing many children; fertile, prolific, fruitful
ولود walūd frequently producing offspring, bearing many children; fertile, prolific, fruitful; littering, having young
ولودية wulūdīya childishness, puerility
وليد walīd pl. ولدان wildān newborn child, baby; boy, son; young, new; (with foll. genit.) the product of, the result of, occasioned by, engendered by, sprung from │ ساعته وليد w. sā‘atihi conceived on the spur of the moment (idea, plan, etc.)
وليدة walīda pl. والئد walā’id  newborn girl; girl; product
وليد wulaid little child
مولد maulid pl. موالد mawālid  birthplace; birthday; anniversary, birthday 1097 of a saint (also Chr.) │ النبوي المولد (nabawī), النبي مولد m. an-nabīy the prophet’s birthday; المولد لغة lugat al-m. mother tongue, native language
time birth; mawālīd  مواليد pl. milād ميالد age مواليد pl. birthday; nativity; birth. of │ etc.) (recruitment, groups age classes, قبل (Chr.); Christmas al-m. ‘īd عيد الميالد قبل الميالد only or (sayyid) ميالد السيد المسيح nuqṣān نقصان المواليد B.C.; Christ, before
al-m. falling birth rate
ميالدي mīlādī birthday- (in compounds); relating to the birth of Christ; after Christ,
A.D. │ ميالدية سنة (sana) year of the Christian era
 توليد taulīd procreation, begetting; generation, producing, production; midwifery, assistance at childbirth, delivery │ التوليد دار and للتوليد مصحة (maṣaḥḥa) maternity home; التوليد فن fann at-t. obstetrics, midwifery; توليد (محطة) معمل الكھربائية القوة ma‘mal (maḥaṭṭaṭ) t. al-quwā al-kahrabā’īya electric power station; توليد الھالل “generation of the crescent”, the first appearance of the new moon on the first day of the month
تولد tawallud generation, production
استيالد istilād generation, production
والد wālid procreator, progenitor; father, parent; الوالدان the parents, father and mother
والدة wālida pl. -āt mother; parturient woman, woman in childbed
والدي wālidī paternal
مولود maulūd produced, born, come into the world; birth; birthday; -- (pl. مواليد mawālīd ) newborn baby, infant; child, son; pl. مواليد creations, novelties, nouveautés │ الثالثة المواليد the three kingdoms of nature
مولد muwallid generating, producing, procreative, generative; procreator, progenitor; obstetrician, accoucheur; -- (pl. -āt) generator (tech.) │ O التيار مولد m. at-tayyār or كھربائي مولد (kahrabā’ī) generator, dynamo; O المتناوب التيار مولد m. at-t. al-mutanāwib alternating, current generator, alternator; الحموضة مولد oxygen; الماء مولد hydrogen; ذري مولد (darrī) atomic reactor
مولدة muwallida pl. -āt midwife
مولد muwallad born, begotten, produced, generated; brought up, raised; born and raised among Arabs (but not of pure Arab blood); not truly old Arabic, introduced later into the language, post- classical (esp. of words); half-breed, half- caste, half-blood; (pl. -āt) product; pl. المولدون the postclassical (also, recent)
Arab authors
ولدنة waldana childhood; childish trick, puerility
ولس walasa يلس yalisu (wals) to deceive, cheat, dupe (ه s.o.) III to play the hypocrite; to
double-cross (ه s.o.); to misrepresent, distort (ب s.th.) IV to misrepresent, distort (ب s.th.)
ولس wals fraud, deceit, deception; cunning, craft, double-dealing, duplicity
موالسة muwālasa fraud, deceit, deception; cunning, craft, double-dealing, duplicity
ولط wall volt (el.)
ولع wali‘a يولع yaula‘u (wala‘, ولوع walū‘) to catch fire, burn; to be dead set (ب on), be mad (ب after), be crazy (ب about), be passionately fond (ب of), be madly in love (ب with); to glow with enthusiasm (ب for), be enthusiastic (ب about) II to kindle, light (ھ s.th.), set fire (ھ to); to make (ه s.o.) crave (ب s.th.), inflame s.o.’s (ه) desire (ب for), enamor (ه ب s.o. of) IV = II; pass. ūli‘a to be fond, enamored (ب of s.th.), be very devoted, 1098 be given (ب to); to be dead set, be hell-bent (ب on); to be in love (ب with) V = I
ولع wala‘ passionate love; ardent desire, craving; passion
ولع wali‘ madly in love
ولوع walū‘ greed, craving, eager desire; love
والعة wallā‘a (cigarette) lighter
تولع tawallu‘ passionate love; ardent desire, craving; passion
مولع mūla‘ in love (ب with); dead set, hell-bent (ب on), mad (ب after), crazy (ب about); passionately fond, enamored (ب of s.th.); enthusiastic (ب about), full of enthusiasm (ب for)
ولغ walaga يلغ yalagu (walg, ولوغ wulūg) to lick, lap (esp., of a dog); to defile (في s.o.’s honor) │ الدم في ولغ (dam) to taste blood, become bloodthirsty
ولكن wa-lākin, wa-lākinna (the latter with foil. acc. or pers. suffix) but, however, yet
ولم IV to give a banquet
ولم walm, walam saddle girth, cinch
وليمة walīma pl. والئم walā’im  banquet
وله walaha, يله yalihu, waliha يوله yaulahu
(walah) to lose one’s head, become mad
 (with love, grief, or the like), be thrown off one’s balance, go off the deep end II and IV to make crazy, throw into utter confusion (ه s.o.), drive (ه s.o.) out of his wits V = I; to be infatuated (ب with)
وله walah distraction, utter confusion, giddiness, hare-brainedness; painful agitation; passionate love, amorous rapture
ولھان walhān  distracted, confused, bewildered, out of one's wits, giddy, harebrained; passionately in love
توله tawalluh distraction, utter confusion, giddiness, hare-brainedness; infatuation
واله wālih distracted, confused, bewildered, out of one’s wits, giddy, harebrained; grief-stricken, deeply afflicted
متوله mutawallih distracted, confused, bewildered, out of one's wits, giddy, hare- brained
و see ولو
ولول walwala to cry “woo”; to lament, wail, howl, break into loud wails
ولولة walwala pl. والول walāwil  wailing, wails
ولي waliya يلي yalī to be near s.o. or s.th. (ھ ه،), be close (ه ھ، to), lie next (ھ to); to adjoin (ھ s.th.), be adjacent (ھ to); to follow (ه ھ، s.o., s.th.); to border (ھ on); -- (والء walā’, والية walāya) to be a friend (ه of s.o.), be friends (ه with); -- ( والية walāya, wilāya) to be in charge (على or ھ of s.th.), manage, run, administer, govern, rule (على or ھ s.th.), have power, authority, or the command (على or ھ over)
│ يلي ما the following, what follows; يلي كما as follows, like this; يلي فيما in what follows, in the following, in the sequel; ما المالبس من البدن يلي (badana) the underwear, the underclothes; السقف تلي غرفة (gurfa, saqf) a chamber under the roof; الحكم ولى (ḥukma) to take over the government, come into power II to turn (ه ھ to or toward s.o. s.th., e.g., the back, the face of s.th.); to turn away (عن or ه from s.th.), avoid, shun (عن or ه s.th.); to turn around, turn back, wheel around; to flee (عن or ھ
from s.th.); to pass, go by, glide away (days, years); to appoint as manager, director, administrator, governor, or ruler ( ه s.o.); to put (ه s.o.) in cbarge (ھ of), make s.o. (ه) the head of (ھ); to entrust (ھ ه s.o. with, to s.o. s.th.), commission, charge (٩٩٠١ ه ھ s.o. with), assign (ھ ه to
s.o. s.th.) │ دبره واله (duburahū) or ظھره واله (ẓahrahū) to turn one’s back on s.o. or s.th.; األدبار عنه ولوا they turned their backs on him, they turned away from him; ولى ھاربا (hāriban) to wake to flight, run away; وجھه ولى (wajhahū) to turn, face (ھ toward) III to be a friend. a helper, a supporter, a patron, a protector; to help, aid, assist (ه s.o.); to do constantly, incessantly (ھ s.th.); to continue without interruption (ھ s.th., to do s.th.). go about s.th. (ھ) successively, systematically; to pursue, practice, cultivate (ھ s.th., e.g., arts); to follow immediately (ھ s.th.; time), be subsequent (ھ to) IV to bring close (ه ھ to s.o. a.th.); to turn (ه ھ toward
s.o. one’s back. or the like); to commit (ھ ه to s.o. the care or responsibility for), entrust, commission, charge (ه ھ s.o. with); to do, render (ه ھ s.o. a favor); to do (ه ھ to s.o. s.th. harmful), bring (ھ ه upon
s.o. s.th.); to display, evince (ه ھ toward.
s.o. s.th., e.g., indifference) │ ثقته اواله (tiqatahū) to have confidence in s.o.; اواله معروفا to do s.o. a favor V to occupy, fill, hold (ھ an office), be entrusted (ھ with), be in charge (ھ of); to take possession, take charge (ھ of), take over, take upon o.s., undertake, take in hand (ھ an affair), attend (ھ to); to take care (ھ of), see (ھ to s.th.), arrange (ھ for s.th.); to assume the responsibility (ھ for), seize control (ھ of); to take over the government, come into power; to turn away, desist, refrain (عن from), forgo (عن s.th.) │ الحكم توالى (ḥukma) to be in power, hold supreme power; to seize power; اليأس تواله (ya’su) he was seized (or overcome) by despair VI to follow in succession, without interruption; to come continually (على to), arrive constantly (على at); to progress, continue (e.g., an advance, a march) X to possess o.s., take possession (على of), seize (على s.th.), make 0.s. muter or (على); to receive as one’s own, take over, capture, confiscate, requisition, occupy (على s.th.);
 to overpower, overwhelm, overcome (على s.o.); to take prisoner, capture (على s.o.)
ولى walīy near, nearby; neighboring, adjacent; close; -- (pl. اولياء auliyā’ ) helper, supporter, benefactor, sponsor; friend, close associate; relative; patron, protector; legal guardian. curator, tutor; a man close to God, holy man, saint (in the popular religion of Islam); master; proprietor, possessor, owner │ ﷲ ولي the friend of God; األمر ولي w. al-a. the responsible manager, the man in charge; ruler; tutor, legal guardian; ولي w. ad-dam avenger of blood, executor of a blood feud; السجادة ولي w. as-sajāda title of the leader of a Sufi order in his capacity of inheritor of the founder’s prayer rug; ولي العھد w. al-‘ahd successor to the throne, heir apparent, crown prince; النعمة ولي w. an-ni‘ma benefactor
ولية walīya holy woman, saint; woman, lady
والء walā’ friendship, amity; benevolence, good will; fidelity, fealty, allegiance; devotion, loyalty; clientage (Isl. Law) │ الوالء معاھدة mu‘āhadat w. treaty of friendship
والئي walā’ī friendly, amicable, of friendship
والية wilāya sovereign power, sovereignty; rule, government; -- (pl. -āt) administrative district headed by a vali, vilayet (formerly, under the Ottoman Empire), province; state │ المتحدة الواليات (muttaḥida) the United States; العھد والية w. al-‘ahd succession to the throne; -- walāya guardianship, curatorship; legal power; friendship │ واحدة والية على ھم they stick together, they assist each other 1100
اولى aulā more entitled (ب to); worthier, more deserving; more appropriate, better suited (ب for), more suitable, more adequate (ب to); see also under │ اول باألولى or األولى باب من with greater reason, all the more reason, the more so; به أولى ھي منه it is more natural for her than for him, it is for her rather than for him, she is more entitled to it than he is
أولوية aulawīya priority; precedence
مولى maulan pl. موال mawālin master, lord; protector, patron; client; charge; mend, companion, associate; المولى the Lord, God; موالى maulāya and موالنا maulānā form of address to a sovereign
موالة maulāh mistress, lady
مولوى maulawī pl. īya a dervish of the order of Maula Jalāl-ud-din Rumi
mawwāl موال  see mawāliyā مواليا
تولية tauliya appointment (as vali, to an executive position, as successor); resale at cost price (Isl. Law)
والء wilā’ succession, sequence, series, continuation; والء wilā’an or والء على successively, uninterruptedly
مواالة muwālāh friendship; contract of clientage (Isl. Law); constancy, incessancy, continuance (of an action)
ايالء īlā’ annulment of a marriage after the husband’s sworn testimony to have refrained from marital intercourse for a period of at least four months (Isl. Law)
تول tawallin entrance office, taking over of an office to management, direction, administration, government
توال tawālin continuous succession, uninterrupted sequence, continuation │ التوالي على continuously, without interruption; successively, consecutively, one after the other, one by one; توالي على األيام (t. l-ayyām) in the course of time; بتول السنين ي bi-t. s-sinīn with the years, in time, as time goes on
استيالء istīlā’ appropriation; seizure, taking possession; capture, conquest
وال wālin pl. والة wulāh leading, managing, executive, administrative; ruler; governor, vali; prefect (administrative officer, Mor.) │ األمور والة the leading personalities, the leaders
موال muwālin mend, helper, supporter; client, feudal tenant, vassal, dependent, partisan, follower, adherent
موالية muwāliya clientage, clientele, following, adherence
 متوال mutawālin entrusted, commissioned, in charge │ األعمال متولي (ir.) chargé d’affaires
متوال mutawālin successive, consecutive, uninterrupted, incessant; -- (pl. متاولة matāwila) member of the Shiite sect of Metualis in Syria
ومأ IV to motion, signal, beckon, make a sign; to point out, indicate (الى s.th.), point (الى to); to make a gesture
ايماء īmā’ mimic action, gestures, gesticulations │ اإليماء فن fann al-ī. pantomime, dumb show (as an art); إيماء الى īmā’an ilā with reference to
إيماءة imā’a pl. -āt gesture; nod
مومأ mūma’: اليه المومأ the one referred to, the above-mentioned
ومد wamid sultry, muggy
ومس wamasa يمس yamisu (wams) to rub off; to smooth, polish (ھ ب s.th. with)
مومس mūmis and مومسة mūmisa pl. –āt
prostitute
ومض wamaḍa يمض yamiḍu (wamḍ, وميض wamīḍ, ومضان wamaḍān) to flash IV to glance furtively; to wink (ه at s.o.) 1101
ومضة wamḍa (n. vic.) pl. -āt blink, blinking; gleam of light; reflection of light
وميض wamīḍ blinking, sparkle, twinkle
ومق wamiqa يمق yamiqu (wamq) to love tenderly (ه s.o.)
mawāmin موام pl. maumā’ موماء maumāh, موماة
desert
ون wanna i (wann) to buzz, hum (bee)
الوندل al-wandal the Vandals
ونش (Engl. winch) winš pl. -āt, أوناش aunāš winch; crane, derrick │ دوار ونش (dawwār) derrick crane; عائم ونش floating crane; ونش باليد (yad) hand winch
ونى wanā يني yanī, waniya يونى yaunā (ونى wany, wanan, wanīy, وناء winā’) to be or become faint, weak, tired, dispirited, despondent, sapless, effete, lose vigor, flag, languish │ يني ال (with foll. imperf.) not to tire (of doing s.th.); تني ال بھمة bi- himmatin lā tani with unflagging zeal II to be slow, slack, lax, negligent, remiss (في
in some work) VI to flag, languish, relax, slacken; to be or become slack, limp, flabby; to hesitate, waver, temporize (في in), wait (في with)
ونى wanan slackening, relaxation; slackness; weakness, languor, lassitude
وناء wanā’ slackening, relaxation; slackness; weakness, languor, lassitude
توان tawānin tiring, flagging; slowness; flabbiness, limpness; negligence, indifference
وان wānin weak, feeble, spent, exhausted │ وان غير unremitting, untiring, unflagging
متوان mutawānin weak, languid, slack, limp, flabby; negligent, remiss, slow, tardy
وھب wahaba يھب yahabu (wahb) to give, donate (ل or ھ ه s.th. to s.o.); to grant, accord (ل or ه ھ s.th. to s.o.); to present (ل or ه ھ with s.th. s.o.); to endow (ل or ه s.o., ھ with) │ نفسھا ذات من وھبته she gave herself unreservedly to him; ھب hab suppose that ..., assuming that ...; فعلت ھبني habnī fa’altu suppose I had done it; – ھبني ھبني (with foll. acc.) suppose I were -- or I were; ولنھب (wal-nahab) let us suppose that ...
ھبة hiba pl. -āt gift, present, donation, grant │ الھبة عقد ‘aqd al-h. deed of gift
وھبة wahba tip, gratuity
وھابي wahhābī Wahabite; Wahabi
الوھابية al-wahhābīya Wahabiism
موھبة mauhiba pl. مواھب mawtāhib  gift; talent
ايھاب īhāb donation, grant(ing)
واھب wāhib giver, donor
موھوب mauhūb given, granted; gifted; talented; له موھوب recipient of a gift or grant, donée
وھج wahaja يھج yahiju (wahj, وھجان wahajān) to glow, burn, blaze, flame; to be incandescent; to gleam, glitter, glisten IV to light, kindle (ھ the fire) V to glow, burn, blaze, flame; to be incandescent; to gleam, glitter, glisten; to flicker (eyes)
 وھج wahaj blaze, fire; white heat, incandescence; glare of the sun
وھاج wahhāj glowing; white-hot, incandescent; blazing; sparkling, flashing; brilliant, radiant │ وھاج نور (nūr) glaring light; وھاج ذھب (dahab) glittering gold
وھيج wahīj blaze, fire; white heat, incandescence; glare of the sun
وھجان wahajān fire, blaze; glow
وھد II to level, even, prepare (ل ھ s.th. for)
وھد wahd lowland, low ground, depression 1102
وھدة wahda pl. وھاد wihād, وھد wuhad depression, lowland; abyss, precipice, chasm, deep pit, gorge, ravine; lowness, low level (of morals)
اوھد auhad  low, depressed, low-lying (land)
وھر wahara يھر yahiru (wahr) to involve in difficulties (ه s.o.); to frighten, scare (ه s.o.) II do.; to put out, disconcert, confuse (ه s.o.)
وھرة wahra terror, fright, fear, alarm, dismay, consternation
وھران wahrān  Oran (seaport in NW Algeria)
وھق wahq, wahaq pl. اوھاق awhāq lasso
وھل wahila يوھل yauhalu (wahal) to be frightened, appalled, dismayed; to take alarm II to frighten, scare, intimidate, cow (ه s.o.), strike terror to s.o.’s heart (ه)
وھل wahal terror, fright, fear, alarm, dismay, consternation
وھلة wahla fright, terror; moment, instant │ وھلة ألول li-awwali wahlatin at first sight; right away, at once; الوھلة في األولى (ūlā) at first, first off
وھم wahama يھم yahimu (wahm) to imagine, fancy, think, believe, suppose, presume, guess, surmise; to misconstrue, misinterpret (في s.th.), have a wrong idea or notion (في of); -- wahima يوھم yauhamu (waham) to make a mistake, be mistaken ( في in, about) II and IV to instill a delusion, a prejudice, a groundless fear (ه in s.o.); to make (ه s.o.) believe (ان that), make as if V to have a presentiment (ھ of), suspect,
presume, imagine (ه the existence of), be under the delusion (ھ of); to think, believe (ھ ھ s.th. to he s.th. else), regard (ھ ھ s.th. as), take (ھ ھ s.th. for) VIII اتھم ittahama to suspect (ه s.o.); to question, doubt (ھ a fact), have doubts (ھ about); to charge (ه ب s.o. with), impute (ه ب to s.o. s.th.), suspect, accuse (ه ب s.o. of), indict ( ه ب s.o. for)
تھمة tuhma accusation, charge; suspicion; insinuation
وھم wahm pl. اوھام auhām delusive imagination, erroneous impression, fancy, delusion; belief, guess, surmise, conjecture; imagination; bias, prejudice; error; self-deception, self-delusion; illusion; suspicion, misgiving, doubt; foreboding, evil presentiment
وھمي wahmī thought, believed, imagined, fancied; imaginary; seeming, apparent; presumed, supposed, hypothetical; delusive │ ووھمية نفسية امراض (nafsīya, wahmīya) emotional disturbances, psychic disorders
وھمية wahmiya chimera, phantom, delusion; guess. surmise, conjecture, supposition, belief; imaginative power, imagination
ايھام īhām pl. -āt deception, deceit, fraud, imposition; misleading, delusion; suggestion │ اإليھام رفع raf‘ al-ī.
Rectification, correction
توھم tawahhum suspicion; imaginative power; imagination
اتھام ittihām suspecting; accusation, charge; indictment │ االتھام دائرة the prosecuting authority, the prosecution; اتھام قرارال qarār al-itt. information (jur.); االتھام ورقة waraqat al-itt. bill of indictment
اتھامية ittihāmīya (jur.) indictment │ ھيئة االتھامية hai’at al-itt. the prosecuting authority, the prosecution
واھمة wāhima fantasy, imagination, imaginative power
موھوم mauhūm fancied, imagined, imaginary; fantastic 1103
متھم muttahim accuser; indictor; prosecutor
 متھم muttaham suspected, suspicious; accused, charged; indicted; defendant │ المنظر متھم m. al-manẓar auspicious- looking
وھن wahana, wahina يھن yahinu, wahuna يوھن yauhunu (wahn, wahan) to be weak, feeble, lack the strength (في for), be incapable (في of); to grow feeble, languish, flag; to loose vigor or courage │ يھن ال untiring, unflagging, inexhaustible II to weaken, enfeeble (ه s.o.), sap the strength (ه of so.); to discourage, dishearten, wear down, unnerve (ه s.o.); to deem or declare (ھ s.th.) weak IV to weaken (ه s.o.); to discourage (ه s.o.)
وھن wahn weak, feeble
وھن wahn, wahan weakness, feebleness, saplessness
وھين wahīn foreman, overseer
موھن mauhin deep of the night
واھن wāhin pl. وھن wuhun weak, feeble; weakened, debilitated; enervated, unnerved; sapless, effete, spent, dispirited, despondent
  وھى wahā يھي yahī (wahy), wahiya (wahan) to be weak, feeble, frail, fragile IV to weaken, sap (من ھ، s.th.)
واه wāhin pl. وھاة wuhāh weak, feeble; thin; frail, fragile, brittle, friable; flimsy; unsubstantial, inessential, insignificant, trivial; untenable, unfounded, baseless, groundless (excuse, argument)
  واھا واه، look up alphabetically
وي wai woe! shame!
ويبة waiba pl. -āt whiba, a dry measure (Eg. = 33 l)
  ويح waiḥa (with foll. genit. or pers. suffix) alas ...! woe unto ...! (expressing regret, disapproval); ويحك waiḥaka woe unto you! ل ويحا waiḥan li woe to ...!
  واحة wāḥa pl. -āt oasis
ويركو (Turk. vergi) wērkō tribute formerly paid by Egypt to the Sultan; excise tax;
(Pal.) real-estate tax
ويسكى wiskī whiskey
  ويك waika (= wailaka) woe unto you!
  ويكة (eg.) wēka = باميا bāmiya okra, gumbo (Abelmoschus esculentus; bot.)
ويل wail affliction, distress, woe; (with ل or ويل waila with pers. suffix) woe! لك ويل wailun laka or ويلك wailaka woe unto you!
ويله waila pl. -āt calamity, disaster, distress, affliction, woe, misfortune, adversity 1104



ي

يا yā (vocative and exclamatory particle) O, oh
│ حسرتي يا (ḥasratī) oh, my misfortune! يا سالم (salām) good Lord! good heavens! oh dear! طالما يا (ṭalamā) how often ...; how many times ...! للشقاء ويا للتعس يا yā la-t-ta‘si wa-yā la-š-šaqā’ oh, what a calamity! له يا رجل من (rajulin) oh, what a man! ما يا how much! how many! how often I how many times! من <I يا ... (lillāhi) what a calamity is
...! how unfortunate is ...! ترى يا see رأى ياء yā’ name of the letter ي
Japan al-yābān اليابان
ياباني yābānī Japanese; (pl. -ūn) a Japanese 1104
ياردة yarda pl. -āt yard (measure of length)
يازرجة yāzirja astrology
يازرجي yāzirjī pl. -īya astrologer
يئس ya’isa a i (يأس ya’s, يآسة ya’āsa) to renounce, forgo (من s.th.); to give up all hope (من of) IV to make (ه s.o.) renounce or forgo; to deprive of hope (ه s.o.) X = I
يأس ya’s renunciation, resignation; hopelessness, desperation │ اليأس سن sinn al-y. the climacteric
يؤوس ya’ūs in despair, despairing; hopeless, desperate
يئس ya’is hopeless, desperate (person)
ميؤوس mai’ūs: منه ميؤوس lost, desperate (cause)
مستيئس mustai’is hopeless, desperate, (person)
 ياسمين yāsamīn jasmine (bot.)
ياسنت yāsint hyacinth (bot.)
ياطاش yāṭāš: بالياطاش خدمة kidma bi-l-y. (tun.) piecework, jobwork
يافا yāfā Jaffa (seaport in SW Palestine)
يافطة yafṭa, yāfiṭa sign, signboard, plaque, name plate, doorplate
ياقة yāqa pl. -āt collar
ياقوت yāqūt (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. يواقيت yawāqīt  hyacinth (bot.); hyacinth, sapphire │ ياقوت احمر (aḥmar) ruby; احضر ياقوت (akdar) green corundum; جمري ياقوت (jamrī) carbuncle
ياميش yāmīš dried fruits
يانسون yānisūn anise, aniseed
ياور yāwir pl. -īya adjutant, aide-de-camp
ياى yāy pl. -āt spring, spiral spring
يباب yabāb devastated, waste
يبس yabisa a (yabs, yubs) to be or become dry, to dry II and IV to make dry, to dry (ھ s.th.)
يبس yabs, yubs, yabas dryness
يبس yabs, yabis dried, dried out, desiccated, arid; اليبس al-yabs the dry land, land, terra firma
يبوسة yubūsa dryness (also fig., e.g., of writing or speech style)
يابس yābis dry, dried out, desiccated, arid; rigid, hard, firm, compact; اليابسة al- yābisa land, terra firma
يتم yatama i, yatuma u and yatima II to be or become an orphan, be bereaved of one’s parents IV to orphan, deprive of his parents (ه s.o.) V = I
يتم yatm, yutm, yatam orphanhood
يتيم yatīm pl. ايتام aitām, يتامى yatāmā orphan; unique of its kind, unequaled, unmatched, incomparable; -- yatīm f. ة single, sole, one only, isolated │ األيتام ملجأ malja’ al-a. and األيتام دار orphanage
ميتم maitam pl. مياتم mayātim  orphanage
ميتم muyattam orphaned, parentless; orphan
يثرب yatrib  original name of Medina
حبر see يحبور
ميحار mīḥār mace, scepter; crosier; bat, mallet
حمر see yaḥmūr يحمور John yaḥyā يحيى
يخت yakt pl. يخوت yukūt yacht
خضر see يخضور
يخنة yakna and يخنى yaknī a kind of ragout
يد yad f., pl. ايد aidin, اياد ayādin hand; foreleg; handle; power, control, influenoe, 1105 authority; assistance, help, aid; (Isl. Law) (personal) possession, actual control; benefit; favor │ l. With prepositions: بيد يدا yadan bi-yadin personal(ly), from hand to hand; يدي بين ... (yadai) in front of; يديه بين in front of him; in his presence; in his power; بأيدينا bi-aidīnā or ايدينا بين at our disposal; ايديكم بين الكالم (kalāmu) you have the floor, you may speak; من ايدينا بين ما what … are before us or present themselves to us; اليد تحت on hand, handy, available; يده تحت under his authority, in his power; يد على pl. ايدي على (with foll. genit.) at the hand(s) of; يده على or يده عن with his help, through his good offices; الناس ايدي على with the help of other people; at the hands of other people; اليد في in hand, on hand, availahle; -- 2. Construct forms: الجوزاء يد y. al-jauzā’ a bright star in Orion; الدھر يد افعله ال (yada d-dahr) I shall never do it; المظلة يد y. al-miẓalla umbrella handle; النكاح يد conjugal authority (Isl.
Law); اليد ذو powerful, influential; holder of actual control, possessor (Isl. Law); اليد ساعة wrist watch; اليدين سبط sabiṭ al-y. liberal, openhanded, generous; اليد شنطة šanṭat al-y. handbag; اليد شغل šugl al-y. or اليد عمل ‘amal al-y. manual work;
handwork; اليد صفاد handcuff; اليدين صفر ṣifr al-y. empty-handed; اليد عربة ‘arabat al-y. handcart; اليد قنبلة qunbulat al-y. hand grenade; -- 3. Other phrases: بيضاء يد pl. اياد بيضاء benefit, favor; skill, competence, capability, qualification, achievement; يد له في بيضاء to be skilled, versed, experienced in; to have the upper hand in; مبطلة يد (mubṭila) unrightful possession (Isl. Law); محقة يد (muḥiqqa) rightful possession (Isl. Law); امام األيدي مكتوف بقي (baqiya) to stand helpless before ...; بيد يدا دق (daqqa) to clap one’s bands; سبا (ايادي) ايدي ذھبوا dahabū
 aidiya (ayādiya) sabā to be scattered in all directions; يدا اليه اسدى (asdā) to do s.o. a favor; يده في سقط (suqiṭa) to stand aghast, be embarrassed, be bewildered; يده في اسقط (usqiṭa) do.; على يده شد (šadda yadahū) to cling to s.th.; باليد مشغول or باليد مصنوع handmade; المرأة يد طلب (yada l-mar’a) to propose to a woman, ask her hand in marriage; يد ظھر عن شيئا اعطاه a‘ṭāhu ‘an ẓahri yadin to give s.o. s.th. for nothing, give s.o. s.th. as a present; العاملة اليد labor force, labor; العاملة األيدي man power, labor, workmen, hands; باليد قدمه (qaddamahū) to band s.th. over personally, deliver s.th. in person; يد عندي له I am obliged to him (or a favor; في يد له he has a hand in ...; اليد له
في الطولى (ṭūlā) to be powerful in, have decisive issuance on; يد الناس عند له he has great influence on other people, he can accomplish a great deal with other people; يدان بذلك لي ما that is not in my power; يد مد المساعدة (or العون or المعونة) madda yada l- musā‘ada (l-ma‘ūna, l-‘aun) to extend one’s help, lend a helping hand; واحد يد ھم علي (‘alayya) they are in league against me; على يده وضع (yadahū) to take possession of; قصيرة يده he is incapable, his powers are limited
يدوي yadawī manual; hand- (in compounds) │ يدوي شغل (šugl) or يدوي عمل (‘amal) manual work; handwork; صناعة يدوية handicraft; يدوي طراز hand-operated model (of an apparatus); اليدويون العملة (‘amala) the manual workers, labor
يربوع yarbū‘ pl. يرابيع yarābī‘  jerboa (zool.)
ياردة look up alphabetically
يرع yari‘a a (yara‘) to be a coward, be chickenhearted
يراع yarā‘ cowardly; -- (coll.; n. un. ة) glowworm, firefly; cane, reed; reed pen 1106
يرقان yaraqān a plant disease, mildew; jaundice; (coll.; n. un. ة) larvae (zool.) │ الضفادع يرقان tadpoles
ميروق mairūq affected by mildew, mildewy; jaundiced
اليرموك al-yarmūk Yarmuk river (in NW Jordan)
يزيدي yazīdī Yazidi, belonging to the Yazidi sect
اليزيدية al-yazīdīya the religion of the Yazidis; the Yazidia or Devil Worshipers (of Kurdistan)
يزرجة yazrija astrology
يزكي yazakī pl. يزك yazak guard, sentry
يازول yāzūl a variety of wild garlic (Allium roseum L., bot.)
يسر yasira a (yasar) to be or become easy; -- yasura u (yusr) to be small, little, insignificant; to be or become easy II to level, smoothen, pave, prepare (ھ على for s.o., s.th.); to ease, make easy, facilitate (ھ على for s.o. s.th.) │ ل امامه السبيل يسر to pave the way for s.o. to ..., enable s.o. to (do s.th.) III to be lenient, indulgent, obliging, complaisant (ه with s.o.), humor (ه s.o.) IV to live in easy circumstances; to be or become rich; to be lucky, fortunate; to have an easy confinement (woman) V to become easy; to be made easy, be facilitated; to succeed, turn out successful; to thrive, prosper; to be made possible, be possible (ل for s.o.) X to be easy; to succeed, be successful
يسر yusr ease, easiness, facility ; easy, pleasant circumstances; prosperity, affluence, wealth, abundance, luxury
يسرة yasra left aside
يسار yasār ease, easiness, facility; comfort; prosperity, affluence, wealth, abundance, luxury; left hand; left side │ يسارا or اليسار عن to (at, on) the left
يساري yasārī leftist, left-wing (pol.)
يسرى yusrā pl. يسريات yusrayāt left side;
اليسرى the left hand
يسير yasīr easy (على for); small, little, slight, insignificant, (of time) short; plain, homely; simple, uncomplicated
ايسر aisar  easier; smaller, lesser, slighter; more insignificant; more prosperous, wealthier; left; left-handed; left-sided
ميسر maisir an ancient Arabian game of chance (forbidden by the Koran) played with arrows without heads and feathering,
 for stakes of slaughtered and quartered camels
ميسرة maisara pl. مياسر mayāsir  left side; left wing (of an army)
ميسرة maisara, maisura, maisira ease, comfort; prosperity, affluence, wealth, abundance, luxury
تيسير taisīr facilitation
ميسور maisūr pl. مياسير mayāsīr  easily done, easily accomplished, within easy reach y to carry out, feasible without difficulty; easy; successful, fortunate, lucky; prosperous, well-to-do, in easy circumstances
ميسر muyassar facilitated, made easy, within easy reach; successful, fortunate, lucky; prosperous, well-to-do, wealthy, rich
mayāsīr  مياسير -ūn, pl. mūsar موسر
prosperous, well-to-do, wealthy, rich
متيسر mutayassir facilitated, made easy; easy; within easy reach; on hand, available; taking a smooth and successful course, going smoothly; successful, fortunate, prosperous, well-to-do │ متيسر well off, in easy circumstances
يسقجي yasaqjī kavass, consular guard, armed attendant 1107
يسمين yasmīn jasmine
يسوع yasū’  Jesus
يسوعي yasū’ī Jesuitic(al); (pl. -ūn)
Jesuit
يشب yašb jasper
يشم yašm jade
يشمق yašmak and يشمك yašmak (Turk. yaşmak) face veil worn by women
يصب yaṣb and يصف yaṣf jasper ياطاش look up alphabetically يعبوب ya’būb see عب
عسب see ya’sūb يعسوب
عقب also see James; Jacob, ya’qūb يعقوب ya’āqiba يعاقبة pl. ya’qūbī يعقوبي
Jacobite; Jacobitic (Chr.)
يافوخ yāfūk pl. يوافيخ yawāfīk  vertex, crown of the head
يفطة yafṭa (= يافطة) sign, signboard, plaque, name plate, doorplate
يفع yafa’a a (yaf’) to reach adolescence; to be at the age of puberty IV and V do.
يفع yaf’ adolescence; puberty
يفع yafa’ hill, range, highland; -- (pl. ايفاع aifā’) boy at the age of puberty, adolescent, youth, teen-ager, juvenile
يافوت look up alphabetically
قطن see يقطين
يقظ yaqiẓa a (yaqaẓ) and yaquẓa u (يقاظة yaqāẓa) to be awake; to wake; to be on one’s guard, be wary, watchful, alert, vigilant II and IV to wake up (ه s.o.); to awaken, arouse, stir up, provoke (ھ s.th.); to warn, alert, put on his guard (ه s.o.) V to be awake; to be vigilant, watchful, alert, on one’s guard X to wake up, awaken, be awakened, be roused from sleep (على by); to have o.s. awakened, ask to be wakened; to be awake; to be watchful, vigilant, alert
يقظ yaquz, yaqiz pl. ايقاظ aiqāẓ awake; watchful, vigilant, alert, wary, cautious
يقظة yaqẓa, yaqaẓa waking, wakefulness; sleeplessness, insomnia; watchfulness, vigilance; wariness, caution; alertness, keenness of the mind
يقاظى pl. yaqẓā يقظى f. yaqẓān , يقظان
yaqāzā awake; attentive, alert; wary,
cautious; watchful. vigilant │ اليقظان ابو
rooster, cook
ايقاظ īqāẓ awaking, reveille
تيقظ tayaqquẓ wakefulness; watchfulness, vigilance, alertness, wariness, caution
متيقظ mutayaqqiẓ awake; watchful, vigilant, wary, cautious; alert, attentive
مستيقظ mustaiqiẓ awake
يقن yaqina a (yaqn, yaqan) to be sure, certain; to know for certain (ب or ھ s.th.), be sure, be certain, be convinced (ب or ھ of) IV, V and X to ascertain (ب or ھ s.th.), make sure (ب or ھ of s.th.); to know for certain (
 ب or ھ s.th.), be sure, be certain, be convinced (ب or ھ of)
يقن yaqn, yaqan certainty, certitude
يقن yaqan, yaqun, yaqin and يقنة yaqana
credulous, ingenuous, unsuspecting
يقين yaqīn certainty, certitude (ب about), conviction (ب of) │ يقينا certainly, surely, positively; ان من يقين على انا or ان يقين على انا I am convinced, I am positive, I am certain that ...; يقين على كونوا you can be sure; حق اليقين ḥaqq al-y. absolute certainty 1108
يقيني yaqīnī definitely laid down, positive, absolute, indisputable; يقينيات yaqīnīyāt established truths, axioms
ميقان mīqān credulous
موقن mūqin convinced (ب of); certain, sure (ب of)
متيقن mutayaqqin convinced, positive, sure, certain
كون see اليكون
يم II to betake o.s., repair, resort, go, turn, wend one’s way (ھ or صوب ṣauba, نحو naḥwa or شطر šaṭra to or toward a place), set out, head, be headed (نحو، صوب، ھ، شطر for); to direct, turn (ھ s.th.) │ فم في يمم البركان (fami l-burkān) to venture into the lion’s den; شطر وجھه يمم (wajhahū šaṭra) to turn or face toward V to betake o.s., repair, resort, turn (ھ to), make, head (ھ for); to aim (ھ at), intend (ھ s.th.)
يم yamm pl. يموم yumūm open sea; (syr.) side │ يمي من from my side, on my part
يمام yamām (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. -āt, (يمائم
yamā’im  pigeon, dove
يمن yamana u, yamina a, yamuna u (yumn, ميمنة maimana) to be lucky, fortunate II to go to the right V to see a good omen (ب in) X do.
يمن yumn good luck, good fortune, prosperity, success
يمن yaman and يمنة yamna right side or hand; يمنا to (at, on) the right; يمنة yamnatan do. │ ويمنا شاما to the north and south; ويسرة يمنة (yasratan) to the right and left
اليمن al-yaman Yemen
يمنى yamanī from Yemen, Yemenite
يمين yamīn f. pl. ايمان aiman right side; right hand │ يمينا or اليمين عن to (at, on) the right; وشماال يمينا to the right and left; ما يمينه (تملك) ملكت ma malakat (tamliku) yamīnuhū his possessions
يمين yamīn f., pl. ايمن aimun, ايمان aimān oath │ األمانة يمين y. al-amāna oath of allegiance; الصبر يمين y. aṣ-ṣabr perjury; قانونية يمين (qānūnīya) oath of office, official oath; كاذبة يمين perjury; الوالء يمين واإلخالص y. al-walā’ wa-l-iklāṣ oath of allegiance; ﷲ ايمن aimunu llāhi and ﷲ ايم aimu llāhi I swear by God!
يميني yamīnī of or pertaining to the right side, right-hand, right; O اليمينيون the right- wing parties
يمنى yumnā pl. يمنيات yumnayāt right hand; right side
ايمن I aiman, f. يمنى yumnā right-hand, right, on the right; lucky
ميمنة maimana pl. ميامن mayāmin  right side; right wing (of an army)
تيمن tayammun auspiciousness, good augury, good omen
ميمون maimūn pl. ميامن mayāmin fortunate, lucky; blessed; monkey │ ميمون الطائر favorable, auspicious; الطائر على الميمون happy journey! Godspeed!
ميمن muyamman lucky, auspicious
يناير yanāyir , ينائر yanā’ir  January
نبع see yanbū‘ ينبوع
aniseed anise, )يانسون (= yansūn ينسون
ينع yana‘a a i (yan‘, yun‘, ينوع yunū‘) to become ripe, ripen, mellow IV do.
ينيع yanī‘ ripe, mellow
ايناع īnā‘ ripening, mellowing
يانع yāni‘ pl. ينع yan‘ ripe, mellow
اليھود al-yahūd the Jews, Jewry يھودي yahūdī Jewish; Jew يھودية yahūdīya Judaism
يوبيل yūlbīl jubilee
the John يوحنا الصابغ │ John yūḥannā يوحنا 1109 Baptist
 يود yūd iodine
ياور look up alphabetically
يورانيوم yūrāniyum uranium
يوزباشي yuzbašī pl. -īya captain, battery commander; (as a naval rank) lieutenant (formerly, Eg.)
يوسف yūsuf Joseph; (eg., sur.) افندي يوف y. afandī (coll.) tangerines
يوسفي yūsufī (eg.) tangerines
يوطنة (from Fr. lieutenant; tun.) yūṭana) lieutenant
يوغسالفيا yūgōslāviyī Yugoslavia
يوغوسالفي yūgōslāvī Yugoslavian
يافة look up alphabetically
July yūliya يوليه and yūliyō يوليو
يوم III to hire by the day (ه s.o.)
يوم yaum pl. ايام ayyām day; pl. also: age, era, time │ اليوم al-yauma today; يوم yauma on the day when ...; ايام ayyāma in the days of, during; اياما ayyāman for a few days; ايامه ayyāmahū his lifetime, his life يومھا yaumahā then, at that time, that day; يوما or ما يوم sometime, some day, one of these days; يوم ذات data yaumin one day, once; يوما يوما or فيوما يوما or يوم بعد يوما or  يوم عن يوما day by day, day after day, from day to day; اليوم بعد from today on, starting today; ھذا يومنا في nowadays, these days; في وليلة يوم (laila) overnight, from one day to the other; يوم كل kulla yaumin daily, every day; يوم الى يوم من or ليوم يوم من from one  day to the other, from day to day; يومه من from that time on, henceforth; right away; اليوم منذ from now on, as of now, henceforth; ايام من a few days ago; for the put few days; بأيام ذلك بعد a few days after that; -- األحد يوم y. al-aḥad Sunday; يوم اإلثنين y. al-itnain Monday; الثلثاء يوم y. at- talātā’ Tuesday; األربعاء يوم y. al-arbi‘ā’ Wednesday; الخميس يوم y. al-kamīs Thursday; الجمعة يوم y. al-jum‘a Friday; يوم السبت Saturday; -- اسود يوم black day, unlucky day; االشتغال يوم workday; ايوم يوم (aiwam) a bad day;  الدين يومy. Ad-dīn the Day of Judgment; السنة رأس يوم y. ra’s as- sana New Year’s Day; عطلة يوم y. ‘uṭla day off, free day, holiday; اليوم ابن ibn al-y. man of today, modern man; يومه ابن of one
day, short-lived, passing, ephemeral; ابن األيام a man of the world, a sophisticated man; األيام توالى على (tawālī l-a.) in the course of time, in time
يومئذ yauma’idin (on) that day, then, at that time
يومذاك yaumadāka (on) that day, then
يومي yaumī daily; by the day; يومي daily, every day; يوميات everyday events; everyday chronicle; daily news │ جريدة يومية daily newspaper
يومية yaumīya daily wages, a day’s wages; daily ration; a day’s work, daily task; diary, journal; daybook; calendar
مياومة muyāwama work by the day, day labor; muyāwamatan daily, by the day, per day, per diem │ مياومة عامل day laborer, hired man
اليونان al-yūnān the Greeks; Greece
يوناني yūnānī Greek; (pl. -ūn) a Greek
يونانية yūnānīya Grecism; Greek language
يونس yūnus Jonah
al-y. hai’at ھيئة اليونسكو al-yūnēskō, اليونسكو
UNESCO, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
يونوسفير yonosfēr ionosphere (radio)
يونيو yūniyō and يوية yūniya June 1110
